@comment -*-texinfo-*-
@comment $Id: TROUBLESHOOTING_win.texi,v 1.1 2003/08/08 14:27:06 pertusus Exp $
@c FILE:    INSTALL.texi
@c PURPOSE: Installation instructions for Singular on MSWindows
@c          This file is displayed during installation and copied to
@c          /etc/INSTALL

@ifclear VERSION
@include version.texi
@end ifclear

@ifclear singularmanual
@majorheading Troubleshooting for Singular on MS Windows.
@end ifclear

@strong{RECOMMENDATIONS:}
@itemize

@item If possible, install @code{Singular} in the directory, containing no spaces (that is, rather in @code{C:\Singular} than in @code{C:\Program Files\Singular})
@item If you have any earlier version of @code{Singular} installed, please uninstall it before setting up a newer version
@end itemize

@strong{GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS:}
@enumerate
@item In the text below, we assume the directory @code{C:\Singular} to be
the destination folder for the Singular installation.
@item For typing system commands (if required), you can use one of the three shells:
@itemize
@item rxvt terminal (Start->Programs->Singular 2.0->Tools->rxvt terminal, runs Unix Bash shell)
@item Bash shell (Start->Programs->Singular 2.0->Tools->Bash shell)
@item MS-DOS Command Prompt (Start->Programs->MS-DOS Command Prompt)
@end itemize
We highly recommend to use rxvt terminal.
@end enumerate

@table @strong

@item While extracting files, there is a message @code{Setup failed to launch installation engine:} @code{Error loading type library/DLL}.

Such a problem could appear on Win 95/98. 
You need to download and execute Microsoft DCOM98 package
@uref{http://www.microsoft.com/com/dcom/dcom98/download.asp}. 


@item On startup, the DLL @code{cygwin1.dll} can not be found.
@itemize
@item
Make sure that (1) the installation did not generate any error messages;
(2) you have rebooted your machine after a
successful installation (Win95/98/ME only);  
(3) the @code{BasicCygwin} component was not de-selected
during a custom installation.
@c and (4) (eventually Win 95/98) the destination folder chosen during the installation does not contain folder names which are longer than 8 characters, or contain spaces or periods.
@item
Make sure that the file @code{C:\Singular\bin\cygwin1.dll} is present in your system.
@item
If the problem persists, please try to localize the source of the
problem as explained below, and, in any case, @emph{please send} an email
to  @email{singular@@mathematik.uni-kl-de} with a description of your problem.
@item
Make sure the directories @code{C:\Singular\bin} and @code{C:\Singular\usr\local\Singular\@value{VERSION}\ix86-Win}
are contained in your @code{PATH} environment variable. To
check this, open either an MS-DOS command prompt and type @code{PATH}
or an rxvt terminal and type @code{echo $PATH}. If these
directories are not contained in the listings of directories of the
@code{PATH} variable, set them as follows and then (on Win 95/98/ME only)
@emph{restart} your computer :
@*On Windows 95/98/ME, add the following line to your @code{AUTOEXEC.BAT}
file:
@example
SET PATH=C:\SINGULAR\BIN;C:\SINGULAR\USR\LOCAL\SINGBIN;%PATH%
@end example
On Windows NT/2K/XP add these paths to the @code{PATH} variable in your @code{Environment}
control panel.

@item
Make sure that your chosen destination folder is correctly mounted to the
root of your (Cygwin) file system: Open an rxvt terminal, and type in
@code{mount}. This should produce an output which looks like:
@example
Device              Directory           Type         Flags
C:\Singular         /                   system       binmode
@end example
If not, make sure that the @code{mount.exe} command is contained in this
directory, and then type at the command line:
@example
mount -f -s -t C:\Singular /
@end example
@end itemize

@item Could not get expanded executable from @code{/usr/local/Singular/@value{VERSION}/ix86-Win/Singular}
@item Error: Couldn't find @code{ESingular} anywhere
@* These problems have common origin - they indicate that @code{cygwin}
mounts are not correctly set.

@itemize
@item @strong{Step 1}. Searching for the wrong setting
@* Open an rxvt terminal and type @code{mount}. You will get a list of mounts,
present in the system. @code{Singular} installation creates
the following three mounts (they are of crucial importance for running
@code{Singular}) :
@example
C:\Singular\usr\lib on /usr/lib type system (binmode)
C:\Singular\bin on /usr/bin type system (binmode)
C:\Singular on / type system (binmode)
@end example
Moreover, if you create your own mounts, say,
executing @code{mount -f -u -t C: /C}, you will see more lines like this:
@example
C: on /C type user (textmode)
@end example
@item @strong{Step 2}. Removing the problem
@* If you see any extra mount points, which have the same posix name
(like "/", "/usr/bin", "/usr/lib"), you have to remove them.
@* Suppose there are two "root" mount points, namely 
@example
C:\Singular on / type system (binmode)
C: on / type user (textmode)
@end example 
You have to call the "unmount" procedure, which in this concrete
example will be @code{umount -u / }. Thus you remove the wrong
user mount and the correct one will be activated.
Type @code{umount --help} for more information on this command.

@item @strong{Alternative}
@* If you have problems removing or setting mount, you can
do it also with the Registry Editor. However, this is recommended
for advanced users.

@enumerate
@item Close all your cygwin-related applications
@item open Registry Editor
@item navigate either to @code{HKEY_CURRENT_USER} or 
@code{HKEY_USERS\Default} window 
(on Win NT/2K/XP you can also check @code{HKEY_LOCAL_MASHINE}).
@item go to @code{SOFTWARE/Cygwin Solutions/Cygwin/mounts v2}.
It is the place, where mount points are described. Suppose we
have an extra "/" mount like in the previous step.
Find the mount you need (that is, "/") and check its properties, 
then delete the whole key (graphically it looks like the folder), 
which corresponds to @code{C:} (do not delete the one 
corresponding to @code{C:\Singular}!). After this, close
the Registry Editor, open rxvt terminal and type "mount" again.
Now the mounts should be correct.
@end enumerate
@end itemize


@item During the installation, an error is displayed complaining that an environment variable can not be set.
@*Repeat the installation, and make sure that:
@itemize
@item On Windows 95/98/ME, the file @code{C:\AUTOEXEC.BAT} is not
hidden and not write-protected.
@item On Windows NT/2K/XP, you are logged on either as user
@code{Administrator} or as a user with the Administrator rights during the installation.
@end itemize

@item @*On start-up of @code{ESingular}, the @code{xemacs} editor can not be found.
@*Make sure that (1) the folder @code{C:\Singular\usr\local\Singular\@value{VERSION}\ix86-Win} is contained in your
@code{PATH} (see above for details) and (2) that the file
@code{C:\Singular\usr\local\Singular\@value{VERSION}\ix86-Win\xemacs.exe} exists.
@*Open an rxvt terminal and type @code{xemacs}
(or, alternatively, @code{which xemacs}). 
If this fails (or returns nothing), make sure your root mount "/" is set correctly (see above).

@item @*What help systems are available for @code{Singular}?
@*There are following help files in @code{C:\Singular\usr\local\Singular\@value{VERSION}}:
@itemize
@item @code{\info\singular.hlp} - Singular Manual in texinfo format,
@item @code{\html\Manual.hlp} - Singular Manual in Windows Help format (is set by default),
@item @code{\html\*.htm} (in the Typical and Custom setup components) - Singular Manual in HTML format.
@end itemize
@c @* The default help browser for Windows is set to @code{winhlp}.
@* You can tell Singular which help to use either from the command-line (e.g. @code{system("--browser","html")})
or add this command to the file @code{\LIB\.singularrc}.


@item @*There are @code{Singular.exe}, @code{TSingular.exe} and @code{ESingular.exe} files. What is the difference between them?
@*The most important executables in @code{C:\Singular\usr\local\Singular\@value{VERSION}\ix86-Win} are :
@itemize
@item @code{runESingular.exe} - Singular inside the XEmacs editor (appears only if XEmacs is installed),
@item @code{runTSingular.exe} - Singular inside the Cygwin xterm (rxvt) application,
@item @code{Singular.exe} - could be run from the command line either in a Bash shell, or in an MS-DOS command prompt.
For users convenience, the file @code{Singular-@value{VERSION}.exe} is just a link to @code{Singular.exe}.
@end itemize

@item @*How do I cut and paste with the mouse?
@*First of all, we remind what we call Unix-like cut and paste with the mouse : marking a region while
pressing a left button copies it to a buffer, a click on a middle-button pastes the current buffer at the current cursor position.
@itemize
@item @code{TSingular} and @code{ESingular} - under xterm and XEmacs, cut and paste works like under Unix
@item @code{Singular.exe} from a Bash shell - you can copy and paste a region selected with the
mouse using the @code{CTRL-Insert} (for copying) and @code{CTRL-Shift} (for paste) keys.
@item @code{Singular.exe} from a DOS window - under Windows NT/2K/XP, you can configure the shortcut
calling the Singular to work in the following manner: marking the region with a left-button,
pressing @code{Enter}, and then right mouse button to paste.
To enable this non-default feature, right-click on the Singular shortcut
on your desktop, check Properties, click on tab Options,
where check the "Quick-Edit Mode" and "Insert (Exclusive) Mode" boxes and apply changes.
Under Windows 95/98/ME, this unfortunately doesn't work properly.
@end itemize

@item @*How to uninstall Singular-@value{VERSION} under Windows manually?
@*The installation of Singular-@value{VERSION} for Windows consists of the three following components:
@*(C1) Essential files ( in the installation directory)
@*(C2) Shortcuts in Start Menu and on the Desktop
@*(C3) Registry entries (Win NT/2K/XP) or @code{autoexec.bat} entries (Win 95/98/ME)

@*To uninstall it, do the following :

@*(C1) The essential files can be removed directly using the Explorer.
@*(C2) To delete the shortcuts: right-click on the Start button, select
Open - All Users. Then you go to  the Program Files folder and you'll see
the Singular 2.0 folder there, which is to be deleted. The shortcuts on the Desktop could be removed directly using the Explorer.
@*(C3) At first, 
@itemize
@item For Win 95/98/ME users : open the file @code{autoexec.bat} 
@item For Win NT/2K/XP users : click  Start->Settings->Control Panel->System->Environment.
@end itemize

@* And then : just remove the line @code{HOME=...} if it corresponds to Singular-@value{VERSION} (i.e. if it looks like @code{HOME=C:\Singular\home\Singular}). 
You can leave the @code{PATH} variable as it is,
but if you want to clean it anyway, try to figure out paths in it, which look like 
@code{C:\Singular\bin; C:\Singular\usr\local\Singular\@value{VERSION}\ix86-Win}. 
@strong{But don't delete the string @code{PATH} itself!} 

@item @*How to configure Singular-@value{VERSION} for use by many users under Win NT/2K/XP?
@* You are installing Singular-@value{VERSION} with the administrator rights, the 
@emph{system variables} @code{Path} and @code{HOME} are set by default. There exists also a 
@emph{user variable} @code{HOME}, which overruns the system variable for the current user.
@* Assume that you have Singular-@value{VERSION} installed in the @code{C:\Singular} directory and your user is named @code{NewUser}.

@*1) Create the directory, say, @code{C:\Singular\home\NewUser}
@*2) Copy and edit the files @code{.profile} and @code{.bashrc} to this directory from the 
@code{C:\Singular\home\Singular}.
@*3) Set @emph{user variable} @code{HOME} to @code{C:\Singular\home\NewUser} by clicking and editing Start->Settings->Control Panel->System->Environment. User variables are listed in the respective subwindow below.
@*4) Click the "Apply changes" button.

The Singular-specific global settings for all the users you can add to the .singularrc file, which you can find in @code{C:\Singular\usr\local\Singular\@value{VERSION}\LIB}.
For more information on @code{.singularrc}, see the Singular manual. 

@item Conflicting @code{HOME} variables

The system variable @code{HOME} is used by Singular and other programs. The
modifications of this variable during the installation procedure may
lead to conflicts.
@enumerate

@item Where is the variable @code{HOME} defined?

@itemize
@item Windows 95/98/ME

@code{HOME} is defined by a line @code{SET HOME = ...} in the file @code{autoexec.bat}. 
@item Windows NT/2K/XP

Under "Environment" in the "Control Panel" there could be two
definitions of @code{HOME}, namely as a @emph{system variable} (in the upper subwindow) and as a @emph{user variable} (in the lower subwindow). By default, the variable @code{HOME}
appears only as a @emph{system variable} or does not appear at all.
@end itemize

@item How is the variable @code{HOME} modified by the Singular installation?

@itemize
@item Windows 95/98/ME

A new line @code{SET HOME = ...} defining the Singular home directory is
inserted in the file @code{autoexec.bat} after the existing line 
@code{SET HOME =...} defining the user home directory.
To prevent the system from destroying the old settings, replace the line
@code{SET HOME = ...} defining the user home directory by the line
@code{REM SET HOME = ...} or copy it to another place.

@item Windows NT/2K/XP

If the value of the variable @code{HOME} is correct (i.e. the given directory
exists), the installation proceed as follows.
First, a copy of the old variable @code{HOME} is moved to the new variable
@code{OLDHOME}. You will be prompted by the Setup program if
such replacements take place. 
Afterwards, the variable @code{HOME} is set to the Singular home directory.
If either the variable @code{HOME} is not defined or
it contains a non-existing path, then
the variable @code{HOME} is set to the Singular home directory.
@end itemize

@item Where is the value of the variable @code{HOME} relevant?

@itemize
@item Some versions of @code{(X)Emacs} for Windows and other programs
(like Star Office) need this variable to find their home directory.
So need it the @code{XEmacs} version 21.1.13, which is included in the
Singular-@value{VERSION} distribution.
In order to use different versions of (X)Emacs, one has to run (X)Emacs
and ESingular (which works as an application within the XEmacs 21.1.13,
shipped with the distribution) separately and eventually use some tricks
(like batch files or registry macros) for changing the value
of the variable @code{HOME} appropriately.

@item Shortcuts like Singular, TSingular, ESingular, Bash Shell, or Xemacs
will be run from the directory defined by the variable @code{HOME}.
In order to run Singular, TSingular, and ESingular programs via
shortcuts from the directory, which is different from the one defined in @code{HOME},
you can proceed as follows:
@enumerate
@item Define a new variable ( @code{SINGHOME}, for example) containing the path of the
directory you wish to use.
@item Right click on one of the shortcuts Singular, TSingular, or ESingular
and choose "Shortcut tab".
@item Enter @code{%SINGHOME%} in the field "Start in". By default,
this field contains the string @code{%HOME%}.
Note that there are two types of independent shortcuts, namely on the
desktop and in the "Start" menu.
@end enumerate

@item Troubleshooting and additional information

The following variables could be set additionally
for various troubleshooting operations :
@table @asis
@item @code{ESINGULAR_EMACS} = the full path to @code{emacs.exe} or @code{xemacs.exe},
@item @code{ESINGULAR_SINGULAR} = the full path to your file @code{Singular.exe},
@item @code{ESINGULAR_EMACS_LOAD} = the full path to your file @code{.emacs-singular},
@item @code{ESINGULAR_EMACS_DIR} = the full path to your directory @code{/Singular/@value{VERSION}/emacs}.
@end table

If some of these variables are present in the system,
Singular will use them internally for calling the respective data.
@end itemize
@end enumerate

@item @*On a Laptop which is not connected to the network, Xemacs hangs.
Remove your network card and restart Xemacs.
@end table



For any other troubles, please visit the @strong{Singular Forum} 
at @uref{http://www.singular.uni-kl.de/forum} or
send an email to @email{singular@@mathematik.uni-kl.de}
and include the header which is displayed by starting up @code{Singular}
with the @code{-v} option, and a description of your machine and
operating system.

@include info.texi

@ifclear singularmanual
GOOD LUCK and ENJOY!
Your @code{Singular} team.
@end ifclear
