@c
@c This file is part of the ``Texinfo to HTML Converter'' manual
@c which is part of the ``texi2html'' distribution.
@c
@c License:
@c 
@c    Copyright (C) 2003 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c   
@c    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim
@c    copies of this manual provided the copyright notice and
@c    this permission notice are preserved on all copies.
@c    
@c    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified
@c    versions of this manual under the conditions for verbatim
@c    copying, provided that the entire resulting derived work is
@c    distributed under the terms of a permission notice
@c    identical to this one.
@c    
@c    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations
@c    of this manual into another language, under the above
@c    conditions for modified versions, except that this
@c    permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
@c    by the Free Software Foundation.
@c
@c Revisions:
@c $Id: custhtml.texi,v 1.5 2003/10/16 21:01:45 pertusus Exp $
@c
@c Author:
@c   Dumas Patrice <dumas@centre-cired.fr>
@c
@c Description:
@c   Informations about customizing html and text style in 
@c   initialization files.
@c
@c ========================================================

@node Customizing HTML
@chapter Customizing @acronym{HTML} and text style in init files

Some simple customization may be achieved with the redefinition of the 
variables 
associated with the command line options. For the description and an 
explanation of the meaning of these variables, @ref{Style options}.

Other variables and hash entries can be modified in initialization file
to achieve more customization.
Lastly, functions references corresponding with functions called from 
the main program and initialization files may 
be redefined.

@menu
* Two contexts::                 there are two different contexts for command
                                 expansion: normal text and preformatted text.
* Commands without argument:: 
* Style and accent commands::    
* Anchors images and spaces::    Formatting of @code{@@anchor}, @code{@@image} and @code{@@sp}
* Text::                         Some characters are special in @acronym{HTML} and
                                 should be protected
* Skipped commands::           
* References::
* Alignement commands::           @code{@@center}, @code{@@flushleft}@dots{}
* Paragraph and preformatted region::
* Complex formats::              @code{@@example}, @code{@@display}@dots{}
* Lists tables and quotation::
* Definitions::
* Headings::
* Special regions::              @code{@@verbatim}, @code{@@cartouche}
* Menus::                    
* Indices::
* Footnotes::

@end menu

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node Two contexts
@section Two contexts for command and test expansion: preformatted and normal

There are two contexts of interest, one is the normal context, the other
is a special context, called the @dfn{preformatted} context. The preformatted
context occurs when the spacing between words is kept. This is the
case, for example, in @code{@@display} or @code{@@example} regions, and in 
menu comments (@pxref{Menus}). The preformatted regions are usually
rendered in @code{<pre>} elements in @acronym{HTML}.

Some @acronym{HTML} elements are not allowed in preformatted context.
This is the case for @code{<table>}, for example.
Thus, sometime, a function doing some formatting have to reopen and 
reclose the preformatted context around the newly generated text.

For example, we suppose we have @acronym{HTML} resulting from command 
@example
@@foo
@@item an item
@@end foo
@end example
looking like:
@example
<table><tr><td>an item</td></tr></table>
@end example
with @code{foo_item} the function formating the @code{@@foo} @code{@@item} 
line.

And the @acronym{HTML} resulting from:
@example
@@example
some text
@@end example
@end example
looks like 
@example
<pre>
some text
</pre>
@end example

Suppose that we want to handle the construct:
@example
@@example
@@foo                                                                           
@@item an item
@@end foo
@@end example
@end example
This could lead to the invalid @acronym{HTML}:
@example
<pre>
<table><tr><td>an item</td></tr></table>
</pre>
@end example
To avoid that, @code{@@foo} will close the preformatted context
opened by @code{@@example}, and the function @code{foo_item} will have to
reopen it, leading to
@example
<table><tr><td><pre>
an item
</pre></td></tr></table>
@end example
which is valid.

All such function should allready have an hash reference passed as one of their
arguments, the @dfn{state}. The only entry of interest in the corresponding
hash is @code{'preformatted'} which is true if the function was called
in a preformatted context.
Opening and closing the preformatted context should then be done by calling 
a function from the main program, @code{main::do_preformatted} with the 
text and the state as arguments.

Here is an example:

@example
sub foo_item
@{
my $arg1 = shift;
my $arg2 = shift;
my $state = shift;

if ($state->@{'preformatted'@})
@{
    my $text;
    # add some text to $text, 
    # possibly using $arg1 and $arg2.
    return '<td>' . main::do_preformatted($text, $state) . '</td>';
@}
else
@{
    .....
@}
@end example

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node Commands without argument
@section Customizing the formatting of commands without argument

This includes the commands whose name is a nonletter character like @code{@@@@}, 
the commands with lettered characters and braces
but whose braces should be empty, like @code{@@TeX@{@}}, or some commands
associated with accentted letters like @code{@@AA@{@}}. If there happens to
be something within the braces, it is put after the command, thus
@example
@@TeX@{something@}
@end example
leads to the same than
@example
@@TeX@{@} something
@end example

Each of these categories of commands have two associated hashes, one for normal
context, the other for preformatted context. The keys of the hashes are the 
command names, the associated value is the text replacing the command.

The hashes are:
@multitable {one nonlettered character} {in normal text} {in preformatted text}
@item command type @tab in normal text @tab in preformatted text
@item one nonlettered character @tab @variable{%simple_map} @tab @variable{%simple_map_pre}
@item nothing in braces @tab @variable{%things_map} @tab @variable{%pre_map}
@end multitable

To change the @acronym{HTML} resulting from these constructs, just change the
value. For example, if you want @code{&shy;} to be outputted for @code{@@-}
in normal and preformatted context, write in your init file:

@example
$simple_map@{'-'@} = '&shy;';
$simple_map_pre@{'-'@} = '&shy;';
@end example

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node Style and accent commands
@section Customizing accent, style and other simple commands

The formatting of the @acronym{HTML} produced by style and indicatric 
commands (@code{@@tt}, @code{@@code}, 
@code{@@email}, @code{@@titlefont}), the accentuation related
commands taking argument (@code{@@'}, @code{@@udotaccent}, @code{@@dotless})
and miscalleneous commands (@code{@@email}, @code{@@verb}, @code{@@w}, 
@code{@@uref}, @code{@@math}, @code{@@asis}) is controlled by two hash, 
@variable{%style_map} for normal context and @variable{%style_map_pre} for
preformatted context. 

The keys are the command names. The value determine how the command argument
is formatted. If the value begins with @samp{"}, the result is 
enclosed in quotes @samp{`} and @samp{'}. The remaining of the value text
(or the value text if there were no @samp{"}) is interpreted as follow:

@itemize
@item
If a text is empty the argument of the command is left as is. 
@item
If the text is a @samp{&} followed by a name,
like @samp{&function}, the name is considered to be a function name, 
and this function is called to format the argument of the command. The
first argument of the function is the command name, the second is 
the command argument. For example, if the value associated with the
(fictituous) command @code{@@foo} is @code{&my_func}
and we have:

@example
sub my_func
@{
    my @@args = split /,\s*/ $_[1];
    return "$_[0]: $args[0]" if ($args[1] = 1);
    return "$args[0]";
@}
@end example

The result of 
@example 
@@foo@{truc, 1@}
@@foo@{truc, bidule@}
@end example 
will be
@example
foo: truc
truc
@end example
@item
If the text is a word, it is considered to be an @acronym{HTML} element
name, and the argument is enclosed between the element opening
and the element closing. For example, if the value is @code{elem}, the
resulting @acronym{HTML} is @code{<elem>@var{arg}</elem>}.
Similarly @code{"quoted} leads to
@code{`<quoted>@var{arg}</quoted>'}.
@item
If the text is a word followed by some text, 
the word and is interpreted as above, and the
text is considered to be the attributes text of the element. 
Thus @code{elem class="elem"} leads to 
@code{<elem class="elem">@var{arg}</elem>}.
@end itemize

Some remarks are in order:

@itemize
@item 
The command argument is allready formatted as @acronym{HTML}.
@item
The nonlettered accent commands which following character is considered
to be the argument (like in @code{@@`a}) should be keys of the
hash @variable{%accent_map} hash, even if no value is associated.
@item
@code{@@math} is handled differently if La@TeX{}2HTML is used.
@end itemize

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node Anchors images and spaces
@section Formatting of special simple commands

The formatting of special simple commands is controlled by functions. To
customize the output, the corresponding function references should be
redefined.

The formatting of anchors is controlled by @variable{$anchor}, but the function
associated with the function reference does more, it is usefull
to produce a reference target or link.
@deftypefn {Function Reference} $anchor anchor $identifier $href $text $attributes
If @var{$identifier} is not empty, this value should be used to create
a target for links (typically associated with a name or id 
attribute in @acronym{HTML}).
The @var{$href} argument specifies a hpertextual reference which should be
used to link to a target.
In case both @var{$identifier} and  @var{$href} are given the text produced
should be both a target for @var{$identifier} and a link to @var{$href}.
@var{$text} is the text to be displayed. 
@var{$attributes} are additional attributes.
It should be reasonable to assume that the attributes are for a @code{<a>}
@acronym{HTML} element. 
@end deftypefn

The formatting of @code{@@image} is controlled by:
@deftypefn {Function Reference} $image image $file_name $basename $preformatted
@var{$file_name} is the image file name, @var{$basename} is the file name
without extension. @var{$preformatted} is true if the image appears in 
preformatted text.
@end deftypefn

The formatting of @code{@@sp} is controlled by:
@deftypefn {Function Reference} $sp sp $number $preformatted
@var{$number} is the numeric argument of @code{@@sp}.
@var{$preformatted} is true if the @code{@@sp} appears in preformatted text.
@end deftypefn

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node Text
@section Protecting special @acronym{HTML} characters in text

Some characters are special in @acronym{HTML} (@samp{&}, @samp{"}, @samp{<} and
@samp{>}) and should be protected.
This is done by the function associated with the function reference

@deftypefn {Function Reference} $protected_text protect_html $text
The function processes the unprotected text @var{$text} and returns
the resulting protected text @var{$protected_text}.
@end deftypefn

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node Skipped commands
@section Customizing ignored commands and text
The ignored commands are the keys of two hashes: @variable{%to_skip_texi}
for commands skipped during the first pass (expansion of macros and values)
and @variable{%to_skip} for the commands skipped during the second pass
(determination of the document structure).

The associated value determines how things following the ignored
command are handled. There are four possibilities:

@table @asis
@item @code{1}
only the command is ignored,
@item @code{space}
spaces following the command are skipped,
@item @code{arg}
an argument following the command is skipped,
@item @code{line}
The line following the command is skipped.
@end table

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node References
@section References

The references are produced with two function references, one for the reference
to external manuals the other for refences within the manual. 

@deftypefn {Function Reference} $text external_ref $command $section $book $node_and_file $href $cross_ref_name
This function formats a reference to an external texinfo manual.
The @var{$command} is the ref command (@code{ref}, @code{xref} or 
@code{pxref}, in text, at sentence beginning or in parenthesis).
The optionnal @var{$section} argument is the section in the book and 
 @var{book} is the book title.
@var{$node_and_file} is the node and file name formatted according to the 
convention used in info: @samp{(file)node}. @var{$href} it an hypertextual
reference to the distant manual constructed using the same conventions
than @command{makeinfo}. @var{$cross_ref_name} is an optionnal cross
reference name appearing in the reference command. This function returns
the text corresponding with the external html manual reference.
This function returns the full formatted text of the external reference.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Function Reference} $text internal_ref $command $href $short_name $name $is_section
This function formats a reference to a node in the current manual.
The @var{$command} is the ref command (@code{ref}, @code{xref} or 
@code{pxref}, in text, at sentence beginning or in parenthesis).
@var{$href} it an hypertextual reference linking to the corresponding
node or section. @var{$short_name} and @var{$name} hold the text for the 
reference but @var{$short_name} can be the node name which is assumed to 
be shorter than the section name.
@var{$is_section} is a boolean true if the reference is a reference to a 
section. This function returns the full formatted text of the internal 
reference.
@end deftypefn


@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node Alignement commands
@section Commands used for centering and flushing of text

When a command controlling the alignement of text is used (@code{@@center},
@code{@@flushleft} and @code{@@flushright}), the main program takes
care of opening and closing paragraphs. The only thing which can be
controlled is an argument given to the function doing the formatting of 
paragraphs. This is achieved by the mean of a hash, @variable{%paragraph_style}.
The keys are the names of the Texinfo commands, the value is the argument
passed down to the function doing the formatting of the paragraphs. 
@xref{Paragraph and preformatted region}.

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node Paragraph and preformatted region
@section Formatting a paragraph or a preformatted region

The formatting of a paragraph region or a preformatted region, is controlled
by function references:

@deftypefn {Function Reference} $paragraph_text paragraph $text $alignement
This function formats a paragraph. @var{$text} is the text of the paragraph,
@var{$alignement} is a specifier for the alignement of the paragraph.
@xref{Alignement commands}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Function Reference} $preformatted_text preformatted $text $region_name
This function formats a preformatted region. @var{$text} is the text of the
preformatted region, @var{$region_name} is the name of the command opening
the preformatted region (@code{example}@dots{}, see @ref{Complex formats}) 
or a identifier for the preformatted context (for example 
@code{menu-comment}, see @ref{Menus}).

The alignment commands are not taken into account, as the spaces are
preserved in preformatted regions, you should flush and center by hand.
@end deftypefn

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node Complex formats
@section Formatting of complex formats (@code{@@example}, @code{@@display}@dots{})

Here we see how a whole complex format is formatted. For the formatting
of the text, see @ref{Paragraph and preformatted region}.

The formatting of the complex formats is ultimately controlled by a
function, however the default for this function uses a hash reference and 
changing the hash reference values should be enough in most cases. This
hash reference is called @variable{$complex_format_map}. It has a key for each
of the complex format commands (@code{example}, @code{smallexample}, 
@code{lisp}, @code{smalllisp}, @code{display}, @code{smalldisplay}, 
@code{format}, @code{smallformat}).

The associated value is also a reference on a hash. The keys are @code{begin}
and @code{end}. An eval of @code{begin} should lead to the beginning of the
formatted @acronym{HTML}, an eval of @code{end} should lead to the end of the 
formatted @acronym{HTML}. The enclosed text will be formatted as described in
@ref{Paragraph and preformatted region}, and the name of the complex
format will be available to the function formatting the text.

If you aren't satisfied with this scheme, you can redefine the following
function reference for a better control over the complex format formatting:

@deftypefn {Function Reference} $complex_format_text complex_format $format_name $preformatted_text

@var{$format_name} is the complex format name, @var{$preformatted_text} is the 
text allready formatted as described in @ref{Paragraph and preformatted region}.
This function returns the whole complex format.
@end deftypefn

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node Lists tables and quotation
@section Customizing the formatting of lists, tables and quotations

The formatting of lists and tables is done at two levels:
@itemize
@item 
At the level of the whole region (table, list or quotation),
@item
At the level of the individual items, rows or cells of the list or table.
@end itemize

@menu
* Table and list items::
* Whole table list and quotation::
@end menu

@c -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
@node Table and list items
@subsection Formatting individual table and list items

In texinfo it is possible to give @code{@@itemize} or table command (hereafter
called a @dfn{format command}) a @dfn{formatting command}. 
For example @code{@@minus} is the formatting command here:
@example
@@table @@minus
@end example

The default is to apply the command to the text item, however it is possible
to avoid it.
The hash @variable{%special_list_commands} has an entry for each of the 
format command. Each of these entries is a hash reference. If a formatting
command is a key of the hash reference, then the formatting command is not
applied to the text item for that format command. For example, if we have:

@example
$special_list_commands@{'itemize'@} = @{ 'bullet' => '' @};
@end example

and we have the following @code{@@itemize}:
@example
@@itemize @@bullet
@@item an item
@@end itemize
@end example

then @code{@@bullet} will not be applied to @code{an item}.

@table @emph
@item lists
The items of lists are formatted using the following function reference:
@deftypefn {Function Reference} $list_item list_item $text $format $command
This function formats the text between @code{@@item} commands. @var{$text} 
is the text corresponding with the item. @var{$format} is the type of format,
@samp{itemize} or @samp{enumerate}. @var{$command} is the formatting command
given in argument to @code{@@itemize}.
@end deftypefn

@item two column tables
The two columns tables (@code{@@table}, @code{@@ftable} and @code{@@vtable}), 
items are formatted using two function references,
one for the first line located on the @code{@@item} line corresponding
with the first column, the other for the text appearing on the
following lines, corresponding with the second column text.

@deftypefn {Function Reference} $table_item table_item $item_text $index_label_text $format $command
This function is used to format the text on the @code{@@item} line.
@var{$text_item} is the text line. In case there is an index entry 
associated with the @code{@@item} (as with @code{@@ftable} and 
@code{@@vtable}), @var{$index_label_text} is the text inserted at 
the place where an index entry appears. @xref{Index entry place}.
@var{$format} is the type of format,
@samp{table}, @samp{ftable} or @samp{vtable}. @var{$command} is the formatting command
given in argument to the table format command.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Function Reference} $table_line table_line $text
This function is used to format the text on the lines following
the @code{@@item} line. @var{$text} is the corresponding text. 
@end deftypefn

@item multitable
The multitable elements formatting is controlled by the functions associated
with two function references. One for a cell, and the other for a row.

@deftypefn {Function Reference} $multitable_cell cell $text
This function is used to format the text of a multitable cell, the text 
following a @code{@@item} or a @code{@@tab}.
@var{$text} is the corresponding text. 
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Function Reference} $multitable_row row $text
This function is used to format a multitable row. @var{$text} is
the row text, with cells allready formatted with the @variable{$cell}
function reference.
@end deftypefn
@end table

@c -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
@node Whole table list and quotation
@subsection Formatting of a whole table, list or quotation

If the Texinfo command is a key of the @variable{%format_map}, the associated
value is used to specify the formatting of the construct, otherwise a function 
is called. 
The value in @variable{%format_map} associated with a command is interpreted 
similarly with values associated with more simpler commands:

@itemize
@item
If the text is a word, it is considered to be an @acronym{HTML} element
name, and the whole table or list is enclosed between the element opening
and the element closing.
@item
If the text is a word followed by some text, 
the word and is interpreted as above, and the
text is considered to be the attributes text of the element. 
@end itemize

In case the @variable{%format_map} isn't used, a function reference called
@variable{$table_list}
should be redefined, the associated function will be called each time
a command isn't found in @variable{%format_map}.

@deftypefn {Function Reference} $whole_table_list table_list $command $text
@var{$command} is the Texinfo command name, @var{$text} is the formatted
items.
@end deftypefn

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node Definitions
@section Definition commands formatting

The formatting of definition commands is controlled by a hash and four 
functions. The hash describes how the text on the definition line is 
interpreted, the functions control the formatting of the definition line
and the definition function text.

@menu
* Definition line::
* Definition formatting::
@end menu

@c -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
@node Definition line 
@subsection Customizing the interpretation of a definition line

The keys of the hash @variable{%def_map} are definition command names.
There are two types of entries:

@itemize

@item If the command is a shortcut for 
another definition command the value is a text and the definition 
command is replaced by the text.

For example if we have:
@example
$def_map@{'deftruc'@} = '@@defvr @{A truc@}';
@end example

and a line like
@example 
@@deftruc var
@end example

the line will be transformed in
@example
@@defvr @{A truc@} var
@end example

@item
If the command isn't a shortcut, it is associated with an array
reference. The first element is @samp{f}, @samp{v} or @samp{t} corresponding
with the index type (@samp{f} for function, @samp{v} for variable,
@samp{t} for type).

The remaining of the array describes how to interpret the text following
the definition command on the definition command line. If the entry begins
with @samp{@{}, then the corresponding item is the next bracketed item
or the next word. The remaining of the entry word specify what corresponds
with this item. Currently the word may be @samp{category}, @samp{name},
@samp{type}, @samp{class} and @samp{arg}.

For example if we have
@example
def_map@{'defvr'@} = [ 'v', '@{category', '@{name' ];
@end example

The first bracketed item following @code{@@defvr} is considered
to be the category and the next one is the name. The index associated
with the definition line is the variables index.
@end itemize

@c -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
@node Definition formatting
@subsection Customization of the definition formatting

Four functions are used when formatting a definition command:

@table @asis
@item category name
@deftypefn {Function Reference} $category definition_category $category_or_name $class $style
This function precise a category or an index entry name associating a class 
@var{$class} (if given) with @var{$category_or_name}. The @var{$style} of the
definition may be @samp{f}, for function, @samp{v}, for variable or @samp{t}, 
for type.
@end deftypefn
@item formatting of the definition line
@deftypefn {Function Reference} $line def_line $category $name $type $arguments $index_label
This function formats the definition line. @var{$category} is the category
formatted with @variable{$definition_category}, @var{$name}, @var{$type} and 
@var{arguments} are the element of the definition line. @var{$index_label} is
the text inserted at the place where an index entry appears. 
@xref{Index entry place}.
@end deftypefn

@item definition text
@deftypefn {Function Reference} $definition_text def_item $text
This function formats the definition text, @var{$text}.
@end deftypefn

@item the whole definition
@deftypefn {Function Reference} $definition def $text
This function formats the whole definition. The definition line and text 
formatted by the above functions are in @var{$text}.
@end deftypefn

@end table

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node Headings
@section Customizing headings formatting

A function controls the formatting of sectioning element headings, 
with the corresponding function reference:
@deftypefn {Function Reference} $heading_text heading \%element_reference
The @var{\%element_reference} is a reference on a hash corresponding
with the sectioning element. The following keys are of interest:
@table @code
@item text
The heading text
@item name
The heading text without section number
@item node
true if the sectioning element is a node without associated structuring command
@item level
The level of the element in the document tree. @samp{0} is for @code{@@top},
@samp{1} for @code{@@chapter} and so on
@item tag_level
the sectioning element name, with @code{@@raisesections} and 
@code{@@lowersections} taken into account
@end table
@end deftypefn

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node Special regions
@section Formatting of special regions (@code{@@verbatim}, @code{@@cartouche})

Regions corresponding with raw text, like @code{@@verbatim}, @code{@@html}
or @code{@@tex} are formatted according to the following function reference:

@deftypefn {Function Reference} $raw_region raw $command $text
@var{$command} is the command name, @var{$text} is the raw text.
@end deftypefn

If La@TeX{}2HTML is used, @code{@@tex} regions are handled differently,
from within the main program.

The @code{@@cartouche} command formatting is controlled by the
function reference:

@deftypefn {Function Reference} $cartouche cartouche $text
@var{$text} is the text appearing within the cartouche.
@end deftypefn

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node Menus
@section Menu formatting

To understand how the formatting of menus is controlled, the different
parts of a menu are first described, then how to control the formatting
of each of these parts.

@menu
* Menu parts::                 A menu consists in menu entry and menu 
                               comments
* Menu formatting::
@end menu

@c -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
@node Menu parts
@subsection The structure of a menu

In @command{texi2html}, a menu is considered to be composed of 2 parts, the
@dfn{menu entries} and the @dfn{menu comments}. Menu entries are further 
divided in an @dfn{entry link} and optionnaly an @dfn{entry description}.
The entry link consists in a node name and an optionnal  menu entry
name.

A menu entry begins with @samp{*} at the beginning of the line. It begins
with the entry link, followed by the description. The description spans until
the next menu entry, or some text begining at the first character of a line
or an empty line, not contained within a command block which begun in the 
description. An empty line or a line with text at the first character
starts a menu comment, which spans until the next menu entry.

Here is an illustration of these rules:

@example
@@menu
* node name: entry name.        description begins
   description continues
* another menu entry::
   description begins
                    description continues

   A menu comment, after an empty line

* node::                        description begins
A menu comment. The line starts at the first character

* last entry::         description begins @emph{text
of the description, even if the line begins at the first character,
because we are in @@emph}.
@@end menu
@end example

@c -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
@node Menu formatting
@subsection The formatting of the different menu components

Some processing of the menu entry is done in the main program without
a possibility of total control. 
However this process may be influenced
by some variable values. 

In the default case, the name of the section corresponding with the 
node is used instead of the node name. If @variable{$NODE_NAME_IN_MENU} is true,
however, node names are used. If @variable{$AVOID_MENU_REDUNDANCY}
is true and menu entry equal menu description the description isn't printed.
Likewise, if node or section name equal entry name, do not print entry name.

A symbol, @variable{$MENU_SYMBOL} is put at the beginning of menu entries
when the node name is used. If @variable{$UNNUMBERED_SYMBOL_IN_MENU} it is also
put at the beginning of unnumbered section names.

The menu comments are considered to be preformatted text. The style 
associated with this preformatted text is determined by 
@variable{$MENU_PRE_STYLE}. The css class associated with menu comments is 
@code{menu-comments}.

Although the main program controls the text of the different components,
control over the formatting of the components themselves is achieved
through the call of 5 functions. The corresponding function references 
should be redefined to change the default formatting.

Three function references are associated with the formatting of the 
different parts of a menu:
@deftypefn {Function Reference} $link menu_link $link_text \%state $href
@var{$link_text} is the text corresponding with the link name, @var{$href}
is the link hypertextual reference. @var{$href} may be absent. @var{\%state}
holds informations about the current context. The only key which could be
of interest is @code{preformatted}, true if the context is a preformatted
context. @xref{Two contexts}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Function Reference} $description menu_description $description_text \%state
@var{$description_text} is the text of the menu description. @var{\%state}
should be used similarly than for the menu link.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Function Reference} $menu_comment menu_comment $text
@var{$text} is the text of the menu comment. It is in a preformatted 
environment.
@end deftypefn

The following function reference controls the formatting of a wole menu:

@deftypefn {Function Reference} $menu menu $menu_components_text
@var{$menu_components_text} is the formatted menu components text, obtained
as explained above.
@end deftypefn

The last function reference corresponds with a special case. It
is used when a menu entry appears within another block command, to
avoid the possibilities of invalid @acronym{HTML} production.
In that case the menu description and menu comments are not formatted 
specially, but treated like normal text.
@deftypefn {Function Reference} $link simple_menu_link $link_text $href
@var{$link_text} is the text corresponding with the link name, @var{$href}
is the link hypertextual reference.
@end deftypefn

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node Indices
@section Indices formatting

Two different things needs to be handled for indices formatting, the place
where the index term appears, the index entry, and the index list itself.
The indexing commands like @code{@@cindex} determines where index entries
appear, and the index list is printed with a @code{@@printindex} command. 

@menu
* Index entry place::             Index entries in the main document are 
                                  targets for hypertext references
* Index list::                    Customizing the formatting of the index list
@end menu

@c -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
@node Index entry place
@subsection Formatting of index entries

Index entry places in the main text may be the target for hypertext 
references. Their formatting
is controlled by the function associated with the following function 
reference:

@deftypefn {Function Reference} $target index_entry_label $identifier $preformatted
@var{$identifier} should be used to create
a target for links (typically associated with a name or id 
attribute in @acronym{HTML}).
@var{$preformatted} is true if the index entry appeared in preformatted text.
@end deftypefn

@c -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
@node Index list
@subsection Customizing the formatting of index lists

The index entries are sorted alphabetically. A whole index list is 
considered to be composed of letter entries. A letter entry is composed
by all the index entries beginning with that letter. A letter may
be a non alphabetical character, but we call it letter here.

An index summary appears at the beginning and at the end of an index list,
and should be used to jump directly to a letter entry. Indices lists
may be split across pages, thus the different letters may appear on different
files. The number of index entries appearing on each page is determined
by a variable @variable{$SPLIT_INDEX}.

The formatting of all these elements is controlled by the following
function references:

@table @emph
@item formatting of a letter in a summary
@deftypefn {Function Reference} $letter summary_letter $letter $file $identifier
This function is used to format a letter appearing in a summary, refering
to a letter entry in the index list.
@var{$letter} is the letter. @var{$file} is the file name where the letter
entry appears. More precisely, it is empty when the letter entry is on the 
same page than the summary, it contains the file name when the index page
is split accross page. @var{$identifier} is an identifier for the target 
letter entry. 
@end deftypefn

@item formatting of a summary
@deftypefn {Function Reference} $summary index_summary \@@alphabetical_letters \@@nonalphabetical_letters
@var{\@@alphabetical_letters} and @var{\@@nonalphabetical_letters} contain the
formatted summary letters, formatted with the above function.
@end deftypefn

@item formatting of an index entry
@deftypefn {Function Reference} $entry index_entry $entry_href $entry_text $section_href $section_heading
@var{$entry_href} is a reference to the place where the index entry 
appeared, @var{$entry_text} is the corresponding text. @var{$section_href}
is a reference to the beginning of the sectioning element containing 
the index entry, @var{$section_heading} is the heading of the element.
@end deftypefn

@item formatting of letter entry
@deftypefn {Function Reference} $letter_entry index_letter $letter $identifier $index_entries_text
This function formats a letter entry, consisting in all the index entries 
beginning with this letter. @var{$letter} is the letter, @var{$identifier} 
should be used to create a target for links (typically links from summaries),
and @var{$index_entries_text} is the text of the index entries formatted as 
described above.
@end deftypefn

@item formatting of whole index
@deftypefn {Function Reference} $index print_index $index_text $index_name
@var{$index_text} is the text of all the index entries grouped by letter
appearing in that page formatted as above. @var{index_name} is the name of
the index, the argument of @code{@@printindex}.
@end deftypefn
@end table

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node Footnotes
@section Customizing the footnotes formatting

Each footnote is associated with a footnote entry. Several footnote entries
are grouped in a footnote section. When a footnote appears, two things must
be formatted: in the main text the place where the footnote appear
and the footnote text. 

Two functions, with corresponding function references control the formatting
of the footnotes:

@deftypefn {Function Reference} {(\@@lines $text_for_document)} foot_line_and_ref $number_in_doc $number_in_page $footnote_id $place_id $document_file $footnote_file \@@lines \%state
@var{$number_in_doc} is the footnote number in the whole document, 
@var{$number_in_page} is the footnote number in the current page.
@var{$footnote_id} is an identifier for the footnote in the footnote text
which should be used to make target for references to that footnote,
while @var{$place_id} is an identifier for the location of the footnote
in the main document. Similarly, @var{$document_file} is the file name
of the file containing the text where the footnote appears in the main 
document, while @var{$footnote_file} is the file name of the file where 
the footnote text appears. 

@var{\@@lines} is a reference on an array containing the footnote text
lines, allready formatted.
And @var{\%state} holds informations about the context at the footnote
place in the main document. As usual the most usefull entry is 
@code{preformatted} which is true if the footnote appears in a preformatted 
context. 

This function returns a reference on an array, @var{\@@lines} containing
the updated footnote text for the footnote entry, and @var{$text_for_document},
the text appearing at the footnote place in the main document, linking
to the footnote entry.
@end deftypefn

The following function is only used when footnotes are at the bottom
of a page and the document is split. 
For customization of the footnotes page in case they are on a separated 
page or section, @ref{Special pages layout}. For 
the determination of the footnote locations, @ref{Page layout options}.

@deffn {Function Reference} foot_section \@@footnotes_lines
This function formats a group of footnotes. @var{\@@footnotes_lines} is a
reference on an array holding the lines of all the footnote entries
formatted as explained above. This function modifies the reference.
@end deffn

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@c -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
@c ========================================================
