@c
@c This file is part of the ``Texinfo to HTML Converter'' manual
@c which is part of the ``texi2html'' distribution.
@c
@c License:
@c 
@c    Copyright (C) 2003 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c   
@c    Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim
@c    copies of this manual provided the copyright notice and
@c    this permission notice are preserved on all copies.
@c    
@c    Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified
@c    versions of this manual under the conditions for verbatim
@c    copying, provided that the entire resulting derived work is
@c    distributed under the terms of a permission notice
@c    identical to this one.
@c    
@c    Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations
@c    of this manual into another language, under the above
@c    conditions for modified versions, except that this
@c    permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
@c    by the Free Software Foundation.
@c
@c Revisions:
@c $Id: custpage.texi,v 1.5 2003/10/14 13:05:38 dprice Exp $
@c
@c Author:
@c   Dumas Patrice <dumas@centre-cired.fr>
@c
@c Description:
@c   Informations about customizing page layout in initialization files.
@c
@c ========================================================

@node Changing the page layout
@chapter Fine tuning of the page layout

Some features of the page layout might be specified with command line
options, the corresponding variables are described in 
@ref{Page layout options}.
Fine tuning of the page layout may be achieved
with redefinition of other variables and function references in the 
initialization files.

@menu
* The different pages::       The different categories of pages.
* The page layout::           The elements of a page.
* Navigation panel::          How to change the navigation panel.
* Program variables::         The available main program variables and some 
                              usefull functions from the main program.
* css::                       Customizing css lines.
* Customizing header::
* Customizing section::
* Customizing footer::
* Special pages::             Customizing table of contents, top, about page.
@end menu

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node The different pages
@section The different categories of pages and sectioning elements

The following sectioning elements can be associated with pages:

@table @emph
@item Normal elements
These are normal sections or nodes. Their association with pages is
determined by the splitting of the document. @xref{Splitting output}.
@item Top element
The top element is the higher element in the document structure.
If there is a @code{@@top} section it is the element associated with
that section. Otherwise it is the element associated with the 
@code{@@node Top}. If there is no @code{@@node Top} the first element is the 
top element.

The top element is formatted differently than a normal element if there
is a @code{@@top} section or the @code{@@node Top} isn't associated 
with a sectioning command.
@item Misc elements
These elements are associated with pages if the document is split.
There are four misc elements:
@enumerate
@item Table of contents
@item Short table of contents, also called Overview
@item Footnotes page
@item About page
@end enumerate

The @emph{About page} shouldn't be present for documents consisting
in only one sectioning element. The @emph{Footnote page} should only
be present if the footnotes appear on a separated page 
(@pxref{Page layout options}), however a footnote element is present if
the document isn't split. The @emph{Table of contents} should only
be formatted if @code{@@contents} is present in the document.
Similarly the @emph{Overview} should only appear if @code{@@shortcontents}
or @code{@@summarycontents} is present.
@end table

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node The page layout
@section Page layout and navigation panel overview

A page is broken up in three parts. A page header, the sections 
and a page footer. A common element in the page layout is a navigation
panel with icons or text linking to other sections or pages. Another
common element is a rule, separating sections or footer. The navigation
panel and the rules may be part of the sections or part of headers or
footers. You may use the variables @variable{$SMALL_RULE}, @variable{$DEFAULT_RULE}, 
@variable{$MIDDLE_RULE} and @variable{$BIG_RULE} for rules of different sizes.

In the header some important meta data may be defined, like the
title or style information, and textual informations may be present
in comments. All this doesn't appear directly in the displayed 
@acronym{HTML}, though.

The page layout is mainly controlled by functions, the precise functions 
called depending on the document splitting. The navigation panel, however,
can be customized with variables.

@subheading Element labels
@anchor{Element labels}

There are 19 items associated with elements. Each of these
is associated with a name and a reference to the 
element they represent, when such an element exists. 
The element is either a global element or an element relative to the current
element. The relative elements are found with respect with the document
structure defined by the section structuring commands (@code{@@chapter}, 
@code{@@unnumbered}@dots{}) or by the nodes (in that case the node 
directions are specified on node line or in menu organization).
These items are called @dfn{element labels}. They may be associated with 
a button (@pxref{Button specifications}), and used in the formatting functions 
(@pxref{Program variables}).

Here is the list:

@table @emph
@item @samp{@ }
An empty button
@item Top
Top element. The associated name is @variable{$TOP_HEADING} if that variable is 
defined.
@item Contents
Table of contents
@item About
About (help) page
@item Overview
Overview, short table of contents
@item First
First element in reading order
@item Last
Last element in reading order
@item Index
The first chapter with @code{@@printindex}. The associated name 
is  @variable{$INDEX_CHAPTER}, if the variable is set.
@item This
The current element
@item Back
Preceding element in reading order
@item FastBack
Beginning of this chapter or previous chapter if the element is a chapter
@item Prev
Previous section on the same level 
@item NodePrev
Previous node
@item Forward 
Next element in reading order
@item FastForward
Next chapter
@item Next
Next section on the same level
@item NodeNext
Next node
@item Following
Next node in node reading order
@item Up
Up section
@item NodeUp
Up node
@end table

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node Navigation panel
@section Customization of the navigation panels buttons

A lot of customization of the navigation panel may be achieved without
redefining functions, with variables redefinition. 
In case it isn't enough, it is also possible to redefine the function 
doing the navigation panel formatting.

@menu 
* General purpose variables::      Variables controlling the navigation panel
                                   at a global level
* Button specifications::
* Panel formatting function::
@end menu

@c -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
@node General purpose variables
@subsection Controlling the navigation panel panel at a high level

The global formatting of the navigation panels may be
changed with the following variables:

@vtable @code
@item $VERTICAL_HEAD_NAVIGATION
A vertical navigation panel will be used for the header navigation 
panel if this variable is true.
@item $ICONS
Icons are used instead of
textual buttons if this variable is true.
@item $SECTION_NAVIGATION
If this variable is false there is no section navigation, no navigation 
panels for the elements within the pages, only at 
the beginning and the end of the page (@pxref{Page layout options}).
@end vtable

@c -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
@node Button specifications
@subsection Specifying the buttons formatting

Several arrays and hashes enable a precise control on the buttons and 
their display. 
The following arrays determine the buttons present in navigation panels:

@vtable @code
@item @@SECTION_BUTTONS
This array is used for the navigation panel buttons present at the begining
of sectioning elements. If split at node or section they are also used 
at the page footer, and in the case of section navigation at the page header.
@item @@SECTION_FOOTER_BUTTONS
This array is used for the navigation panel buttons present at the footer
of pages when split at node or at section. 

If @variable{$WORDS_IN_PAGE} is set and the output is split at nodes, these 
buttons are only present if there are more than @variable{$WORDS_IN_PAGE}
words in the sectioning element text.
@item @@CHAPTER_BUTTONS
This array is used for the buttons appearing at the page footer if split at 
chapter, and at the page header if split at chapter and there is no section
navigation.
@item @@MISC_BUTTONS
These buttons appear at the beginning of special and sections  
and at the end of these section pages if the output is split.
@end vtable

The array specify the buttons displayed in navigation panels, 
and how the button is displayed.
Each element is associated with
a button of the navigation panel from left to right.
The signification of the array element value is the following:

@table @emph
@item reference on a function
The function is called with first argument a filehandle reference on the
current file and second argument a boolean true if the navigation 
panel should be vertical.
@item reference on a scalar
The scalar value is printed. For some possibly
usefull scalars, @ref{Elements hashes}.
@item reference on an array
In this case the first array element should be a reference on text and the 
second element an element label. In that case a link to the 
element associated with the element label with the scalar value
text is generated.

For example if the buttons array element is
@example
[ 'Next', \$Texi2HTML::NODE@{Next@} ] 
@end example

The button will be a link to the next section with text 
@variable{$Texi2HTML::NODE@{Next@}}.
@item element label
If icons are not used, the button is a link to the corresponding
element which text is defined by the value associated with the 
element label in the @variable{%NAVIGATION_TEXT} hash, surrounded
by @samp{[} and @samp{]}. If the element label is @samp{ }, there is
no @samp{[} and @samp{]}.

If icons are used, the button is an image with file determined by
the value associated with the element label in the @variable{%ACTIVE_ICONS}
hash if the the link really leads to an element, or in the @variable{%PASSIVE_ICONS}
hash if there is no element to link to. Of course if there is a link to the 
element the icon links to that element.
@end table

@c -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
@node Panel formatting function
@subsection Changing the navigation panel formatting

If you are not satisfied with this scheme, it is possible to
control exactly the formatting of navigation panels by redefining a function 
reference. The function controlling the display of navigation panel is 
associated with the following function reference:

@deffn {Function Reference} print_navigation $filehandle \@@buttons $vertical
@var{$filehandle} is the opened filehandle the function should write to.
@var{\@@buttons} is an array reference which should hold the specification of 
the buttons for that navigation panel. @var{$vertical} is true if the 
navigation panel should be vertical.
@end deffn

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node Program variables
@section Main program variables and usefull functions

In the functions 
controlling the page layout some global variables set by the main
program are available, with value corresponding with the current
layout element.

@menu 
* Elements hashes::             Accessing information related with the 
                                different elements   
* Global informations::         Accessing global informations, like date, 
                                title@dots{}
* Global functions::            main program usefull functions
@end menu


@c -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
@node Elements hashes
@subsection Accessing elements informations

Four hashes are available, with key the elements labels (as described
in @ref{Element labels}) and values:

@vtable @code
@item %Texi2HTML::NAME
The formatted element name
@item %Texi2HTML::HREF
The element hypertext reference
@item %Texi2HTML::NODE
The element node name
@item %Texi2HTML::NO_TEXI
The element name after removal of texi commands
@end vtable

@c -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
@node Global informations
@subsection Accessing global informations

Three kinds of global informations are available, miscalleneous global
strings, flags set by @code{@@set} and special flags and section lines.

@subsubheading Global strings
The @variable{%Texi2HTML::THISDOC} hash holds some global informations:

@table @code
@item fulltitle
title set by @code{@@title}. If there is no @code{@@title} other 
possibilities are tried (@code{@@settitle}, @code{@@shorttitlepage}@dots{}).
@item title
title set by @code{@@settitle}, or @code{fulltitle}.
@item author
Authors list set by @code{@@author}.
@item copying
Text appearing in @code{@@copying} with all the texinfo commands removed,
put in comments.
@item program
The name and version of @command{texi2html}.
@item program_homepage
Homepage for @command{texi2html}.
@item program_authors
Authors of @command{texi2html}.
@item toc_file
The file name of the table of contents.
@item today
The date.
@end table

@subsubheading Flags
Flags defined by @code{@@set} may be accessed through the 
@variable{%main::value} hash. The key is the flag name, the value is the
flag value at the end of the document. 

Special flags are set by the main program. They correspond with a texinfo
command, like @code{@@setfilename}, or @code{@@settitle}, 
@code{@@author}@dots{} The corresponding flag is the command name with 
@samp{_} appended, for example, @code{_titlefont} corresponds with 
@code{@@titlefont}. Like other flags they are available in 
@variable{%main::value}.


@subsubheading Section lines

The following array references or arrays holds formatted lines:

@vtable @code
@item $Texi2HTML::THIS_SECTION
Lines of the current element.
@item $Texi2HTML::THIS_HEADER
Lines of the current element appearing before the element label (anchors).
@item $Texi2HTML::OVERVIEW
Lines of short table of contents. @xref{Special pages}.
@item $Texi2HTML::TOC_LINES
Lines of table of contents. @xref{Special pages}.
@end vtable

@c -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
@node Global functions
@subsection Function usefull in page formatting

The usefull function is a function used to print an array of lines, which 
also counts the number of words in the array, if needed.

@deftypefun $words_number  main::print_lines $filehandle \@@lines_array
@var{$filehandle} is the opened filehandle the function should write to.
@var{\@@lines_array} is the array line the function should write to the file.
If this argument is omitted, the function uses @variable{$Texi2HTML::THIS_SECTION}.
@var{$words_number} is the number of words in the array, only defined if
split at nodes and @variable{$WORDS_IN_PAGE} is defined.
@end deftypefun

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node css
@section Customizing the @command{texi2html} css lines

It is possible to modify the @command{texi2html} css lines by modifying
the entries or adding to the @variable{%css_map} hash. Each key is a css
selector, the corresponding value is a style string.

The whole css text is in the variable @variable{$CSS_LINES}. If this 
variable is defined the variable value is used instead of being 
constructed using the @variable{%css_map} entries. For example if you don't
want any css entries, set

@example
$CSS_LINES = '';
@end example

It is also possible to change completely the way @variable{$CSS_LINES} are
generated by redefining the following function reference:


@deffn {Function Reference} css_lines \@@import_lines \@@rule_lines
This function should be used to construct the @variable{$CSS_LINES}.
@var{\@@import_lines} are the @code{@@import} lines of the 
files specified with @longopt{include-css}, 
and @var{\@@rule_lines} are the css commands lines of these files.
@xref{Style options}.
@end deffn

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node Customizing header
@section Customizing the page header 

It is possible to add lines to the text within the @code{<head>} 
@acronym{HTML} elements, by defining the variable @variable{$EXTRA_HEAD}.
Similarly it is possible to add text just after the @code{<body>} 
element with the variable @variable{$AFTER_BODY_OPEN}.
The encoding of the document is defined by @variable{$ENCODING} if
no @code{@@documentencoding} appears in the document.

The @code{<body>} element attributes may be set by defining the
variable @variable{$BODYTEXT}. If you want to define that variable
dynamically, you could redefine the following function reference:

@deffn {Function Reference} set_body_text
This function should set @variable{$BODYTEXT}.
@end deffn

The default functions call the function associated with 
@variable{$print_head_navigation} to format the navigation panel for the 
page header. Thus you can control parts of the formatting by
redefining the function reference.

@deffn {Function Reference} print_head_navigation $filehandle \@@buttons
@var{$filehandle} is the opened filehandle the function should write to.
@var{\@@buttons} is an array reference which should hold the specification of 
the buttons for the navigation panel. 
@end deffn

If you want even more control, you can have full control over the page header 
formatting by redefining three function references. The function associated
with @variable{$print_page_head} is called for all the pages, and after that,
the function associated with @variable{$print_chapter_header} is called
if the document is split at chapters, or the function associated with
@variable{$print_section_header} is called if the document is split at sections.

@deffn {Function Reference} print_page_head $filehandle
@var{$filehandle} is the opened filehandle the function should write to.
This function should print the page head, including the @code{<body>}
element.
@end deffn

@deffn {Function Reference} print_chapter_header $filehandle
@var{$filehandle} is the opened filehandle the function should write to.
This function is called if the document is split at chapters, after 
@code{print_page_head}.
@end deffn

@deffn {Function Reference} print_section_header $filehandle
@var{$filehandle} is the opened filehandle the function should write to.
This function is called if the document is split at sections, after 
@code{print_page_head}.
@end deffn

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node Customizing section
@section Customizing the sections

The function associated with the following function reference is used for the 
formatting of sections:

@deffn {Function Reference} print_section $filehandle
@var{$filehandle} is the opened filehandle the function should write to.
This function should print the current section.
@end deffn

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node Customizing footer
@section Customizing the page footer

It is possible to add text just before the @code{</body>} 
element with the variable @variable{$PRE_BODY_CLOSE}.

The footer text may be influenced by @variable{$ADDRESS} which should hold
information about who created the document and how.
If you want to define that variable
dynamically, you could redefine the following function reference:

@deftypefn {Function Reference} $address_text address $user $date
This function should return the address. @var{$user} is the user name
of the user running @command{texi2html}, @var{$date} is the date of the day.
@end deftypefn

The default functions call the function associated with 
@variable{$print_foot_navigation} to format the navigation panel for the 
page footer. Thus you can control parts of the formatting by
redefining the function reference.

@deffn {Function Reference} print_foot_navigation $filehandle \@@buttons
@var{$filehandle} is the opened filehandle the function should write to.
@var{\@@buttons} is an array reference which should hold the specification of 
the buttons for the navigation panel. 
@end deffn

If you want even more control, you can have full control the page footer 
formatting by redefining three function references.
The function associated with @variable{$print_chapter_footer} is called
if the document is split at chapters, or the function associated with
@variable{$print_section_footer} is called if the document is split at sections.
 After that the function associated
with @variable{$print_page_foot} is called.

@deffn {Function Reference} print_page_foot $filehandle
@var{$filehandle} is the opened filehandle the function should write to.
This function should print the page foot, including the @code{</body>}
element.
@end deffn

@deffn {Function Reference} print_chapter_footer $filehandle
@var{$filehandle} is the opened filehandle the function should write to.
This function is called if the document is split at chapters, before 
@code{print_page_foot}.
@end deffn

@deffn {Function Reference} print_section_footer $filehandle
@var{$filehandle} is the opened filehandle the function should write to.
This function is called if the document is split at sections, before
@code{print_page_foot}.
@end deffn


@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node Special pages
@section Special pages formatting

For the special elements, two things must be formatted: the content
and the page layout

@menu
* Special pages content::
* Special pages layout::
@end menu

@c -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
@node Special pages content
@subsection Customizing the content of the special pages

@menu
* Top element text::
* Contents and Overview text::
* Footnotes text::
* About text::
@end menu

@c -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
@node Top element text
@subsubsection Top element text formatting
The top element formatting is controlled by a function which also
controls the layout of the top element page or section. The associated
function reference is:

@deffn {Function Reference} print_Top $filehandle $has_top_heading
@var{$filehandle} is the opened filehandle the function should write to.
@var{$has_top_heading} is true if there is a @code{@@heading} command or
@code{@@titlefont} command appearing in the Top element text.
@end deffn

@c -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
@node Contents and Overview text
@subsubsection Table of contents and Short table of contents
Several variables may be used to control the formatting of table of contents 
and short table of contents:

@table @code
@item $BEFORE_OVERVIEW
The variable value is inserted before the short table of contents text.
@item $AFTER_OVERVIEW
The variable value is inserted after the short table of contents text.
@item $BEFORE_TOC_LINES
The variable value is inserted before the table of contents text.
@item $AFTER_TOC_LINES
The variable value is inserted after the table of contents text.
@item $TOC_LIST_STYLE
This should contain a css style used for the list style if the tables of
content are formatted with a list.
@item $TOC_LIST_ATTRIBUTE
This should contain an attribute text used for the list element if the tables of
content are formatted with a list.
@end table

More control on the table of contents and short table of contents formatting
may be achieved by redefining a function with the following associated 
function reference:

@deffn {Function Reference} toc_body \@@elements $has_content $has_scontent
@var{\@@elements} is an array reference contining informations about
all the elements of the document. Each of the entry of this array is an hash
reference which entries correspond with different informations
about the element. Interesting keys have the following meaning:

@table @code
@item top
true if the element is the top element,
@item index_page
true if the element is an index page added because of index splitting,
@item toc_level
level of the element in the table of content. Highest level
is 1 for the top element and for chapters, appendix and so on,
2 for section, unnumberedsec and so on...
@item tocid
label used for reference linking to the element in table of
contents,
@item file 
the file containing the element, usefull to do href to that file
in case the document is split,
@item text
text of the element, with section number,
@item name
text of the element, without section number.
@end table

@var{$has_content} is true if @code{@@contents} appears in the document.
@var{$has_scontent} is true if @code{@@shortcontents} appears in the document.
@end deffn

This function doesn't return anything but should fill the array corresponding
with the 
@variable{$Texi2HTML::TOC_LINES} and
@variable{$Texi2HTML::OVERVIEW} references with the table of contents and short 
table of contents.

@c -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
@node Footnotes text
@subsubsection Formatting of footnotes text

The footnotes text is allready formatting when @code{@@footnote} commands
are expanded. @xref{Footnotes}.

@c -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
@node About text
@subsubsection Formatting of about text

The default about element contains an explaination of the buttons used
in the document (@code{@@SECTION_BUTTONS}, @ref{Button specifications}) and 
an example locating the buttons targets in an example.
The formatting of this text may be influenced by the following 
hashes and variables:

@table @code
@item $PRE_ABOUT 
@itemx $AFTER_ABOUT
This variable may be a scalar or a function reference. 
If it is a scalar, the value is used.
If this is a function reference it is expanded and the returned text is
used. The text is added before or after the main about text.
@item %BUTTONS_GOTO

The keys of this hash are element labels (@pxref{Element labels}). The value
is the text associated with the element label in the about text.

@item %BUTTONS_EXAMPLE

The keys of this hash are  element labels (@pxref{Element labels}). The value
is the text associated with the element label in the about example, 
typically a section number.

@end table

If this is not enough and you want to control exactly the formatting of
the about text, you can redefine the function associated with the following 
function reference:

@deftypefn {Function Reference} $about_text print_about
This function should return the about text.
@end deftypefn

@c -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
@node Special pages layout
@subsection Customizing the layout of the special pages

The formatting of each of the special pages, or section in case 
the document is not split, is controlled by a function.
The associated function reference is called accordingly:

@ftable @code
@item print_Top
Formatting of top element page or section. It is also used for the formatting
of the top element text (@pxref{Top element text}).
@item print_Toc
Formatting of table of contents page or section
@item print_Overview
Formatting of short table of contents page or section
@item print_About
Formatting of about (help) page or section
@item print_Footnotes
Formatting of footnotes section or page in case footnotes are on a 
separated page or the document isn't split.
@end ftable

In the default case, @variable{$print_Top} calls @variable{$print_Top_header} for
the header and @variable{$print_Top_footer} for the footer of top element.
All the other function call @variable{$print_misc} which in turn calls
@variable{$print_misc_header} for the headers and  @variable{$print_misc_footer} 
for the footers.


