@c
@c     obsolete file!!! Just for compatibility!
@c 
@c This file is part of the ``Texinfo to HTML Converter'' manual
@c which is part of the ``texi2html'' distribution.
@c
@c License:
@c    Copyright (C) 1999, 2000  Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c
@c    This program is free software; you can redistribute it
@c    and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public
@c    License as published by the Free Software Foundation;
@c    either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any
@c    later version.
@c
@c    This program is distributed in the hope that it will be
@c    useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied
@c    warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
@c    PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more
@c    details.
@c
@c    You should have received a copy of the GNU General
@c    Public License along with this program; if not, write to
@c    the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite
@c    330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA
@c
@c
@c Revisions:
@c $Id: extfile.texi,v 1.1.1.1 2001/04/29 07:23:18 dprice Exp $
@c
@c Author:
@c   Karl Heinz Marbaise <khmarbaise@gmx.de>
@c
@c Description:
@c   Here you can find the description on the
@c   extension file.
@c
@c ========================================================
@chapter Extension file
@c
@cindex Extension, texi2html
@cindex texi2html, extension
@cindex texi2html.ext
@c
@c is read in texi2html.pl
@c What can we do with this file?
Here I have to put some explanation about
the extension file @file{texi2html.ext}.

I'm not sure which purpose the extension file has.
May be Olaf can answer this question.
