@c
@c This file is part of the ``Texinfo to HTML Converter'' manual
@c which is part of the ``texi2html'' distribution.
@c
@c License:
@c    Copyright (C) 1999, 2000  Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c
@c    This program is free software; you can redistribute it
@c    and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public
@c    License as published by the Free Software Foundation;
@c    either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any
@c    later version.
@c
@c    This program is distributed in the hope that it will be
@c    useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied
@c    warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
@c    PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more
@c    details.
@c
@c    You should have received a copy of the GNU General
@c    Public License along with this program; if not, write to
@c    the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite
@c    330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA
@c
@c
@c Revisions:
@c $Id: initfile.texi,v 1.2 2001/05/01 14:43:48 dprice Exp $
@c
@c Author:
@c   Karl Heinz Marbaise <khmarbaise@gmx.de>
@c
@c Description:
@c   Here you can find the description on the
@c   initialization files.
@c
@c ========================================================
@chapter Initialization file
@c
@cindex configure
@cindex texi2html.init
@cindex texi2htmlrc, global initialization
@cindex .texi2htmlrc, user initialization
@c
@opindex sysconfdir
@opindex init_file
@file{texi2html.init}


@menu
* InitFileBasics::     The basics about
                         initialization files.
* InitFileGlobal::     Global initialization file.
* InitFileUser::       User initialization file.
* InitFileLoad::       Loadable initialization file.
@end menu

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node InitFileBasics,InitFileGlobal,InitFile,InitFile
@section The basics about init files

Initialization options are read first from
@file{/usr/local/etc/texi2htmlrc} (the exact location being
changeable with the @option{--sysconfdir=dir} option to the
@command{configure} script), then from
@file{$HOME/.texi2htmlrc}, then any command-line options
including @option{-init_file} option; with later settings
overriding earlier ones.

The default initialization options are defined in the
@file{texi2html.init} file contained in the @b{Texi2html}
distribution (which gets includes near the biginning of the
@command{texi2html} script that gets installed).

To customize @file{texi2html} it is best if you copy the
appropriate sections from the @file{texi2html.init}
contents into an appropriate local initialization file,
make the necessary changes there, and then have
@command{texi2html} read this inialization file by one of
the means described above.

For an example on what you can produces with
@command{texi2html} have a look at the following sites:
@uref{http://www.singular.uni-kl.de/Manual/html/}


@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node InitFileGlobal,InitFileUser,InitFileBasics,InitFile
@section Global initialization file
@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node InitFileUser,InitFileLoad,InitFileGlobal,InitFile
@section User initialization file
@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node InitFileLoad,,InitFileUser,InitFile
@section Loadable initialization file
@opindex init_file
@option{-init_file}

@c @ref{InitFile}

