@c
@c This file is part of the ``Texinfo to HTML Converter'' manual
@c which is part of the ``texi2html'' distribution.
@c
@c License:
@c    Copyright (C) 1999, 2000  Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c
@c    This program is free software; you can redistribute it
@c    and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public
@c    License as published by the Free Software Foundation;
@c    either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any
@c    later version.
@c
@c    This program is distributed in the hope that it will be
@c    useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied
@c    warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
@c    PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more
@c    details.
@c
@c    You should have received a copy of the GNU General
@c    Public License along with this program; if not, write to
@c    the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite
@c    330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA
@c
@c
@c Revisions:
@c $Id: options.texi,v 1.1.1.1 2001/04/29 07:23:18 dprice Exp $
@c
@c Author:
@c   Karl Heinz Marbaise <khmarbaise@gmx.de>
@c
@c Description:
@c   Here you can find the description on the
@c   command line options.
@c
@c ========================================================
@chapter Command Line Options

@menu
* OptionDebug::               Debugging.
* OptionDocType::             DocType (HTML)
* OptionCheck::               Checking files.
* OptionExpand::              Expanding info, tex areas etc.
* OptionGlossary::            Glossary.
* OptionInvisible::           Invisible.
* OptionIso::                 Iso.
* OptionInclude::             Include directories.
* OptionTopFile::             Top File.
* OptionTocFile::             Table of content File.
* OptionFrames::              Frames.
* OptionMenu::                Menu's.
* OptionNumber::              Number sections.
* OptionSplit::               Splitting.
* OptionSectionNavigation::   Navigation.
* OptionSubDir::              Subdirectory.
* OptionShortExt::            Short extension.
* OptionPrefix::              Prefix.
* OptionOutput::              Output.
* OptionShortRef::            Short Ref.
* OptionIndexSummary::        Index Summary.
* OptionVerbose::             Verbose.
* OptionLanguage::            Language.
* OptionL2H::                 La@TeX{}2HTML.
@end menu


@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionDebug, OptionDocType, Options, Options
@section Debugging
@cindex Debugging
@vindex DEBUG_TOC
@vindex DEBUG_INDEX
@vindex DEBUG_BIB
@vindex DEBUG_GLOSS
@vindex DEBUG_DEF
@vindex DEBUG_HTML
@vindex DEBUG_USER
@vindex DEBUG_L2H
@opindex debug

@option{-debug}

debugging: 0 --- no debugging; other values; see beginning
of texi2html

@var{$DEBUG_TOC}   =  1;
@var{$DEBUG_INDEX} =  2;
@var{$DEBUG_BIB}   =  4;
@var{$DEBUG_GLOSS} =  8;
@var{$DEBUG_DEF}   = 16;
@var{$DEBUG_HTML}  = 32;
@var{$DEBUG_USER}  = 64;
@var{$DEBUG_L2H}   = 128;

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionDocType, OptionCheck, OptionDebug, Options
@section DocType
@cindex HTML, Doc Type
@opindex doctype
@vindex T2H_DOCTYPE
@option{-doctype}

@example
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.01 Transitional//EN">
@end example

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionCheck, OptionExpand, OptionDocType, Options
@section Check
@cindex Texinfo, checking
@opindex check
@vindex T2H_CHECK
@option{-check}
if set, only check files and give the list of all things
that look like untranslated Texinfo commands

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionExpand, OptionGlossary, OptionCheck, Options
@section Expand
@opindex expand
@vindex T2H_EXPAND
@option{-expand}
if set to @strong{tex} (or, @strong{info}) expand
@code{@@iftex} and @code{@@tex} (or, @code{@@ifinfo})
sections else, neither expand @code{@@iftex}, @code{@@tex},
nor @code{@@ifinfo} sections

@c $T2H_EXPAND = "info";

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionGlossary, OptionInvisible, OptionExpand, Options
@section Glossary
@cindex HTML, Glossary
@cindex Texinfo, Glossary
@opindex glossary
@vindex T2H_USE_GLOSSARY
@option{-glossary}
if set, uses section named @strong{Footnotes} for glossary

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionInvisible, OptionIso, OptionGlossary, Options
@section Invisible
@cindex Mark, invisible
@cindex invisible, Mark
@opindex invisible
@vindex T2H_INVISIBLE_MARK
@option{-invisible}
@var{$T2H_INVISIBLE_MARK} is the text used to create
invisible destination anchors for index links (you can for
instance use the @file{invisible.xbm} file shipped with
this program). This is a workaround for a known bug of many
@acronym{WWW} browsers, including Netscape. For me, it
works fine without it --- on the contrary: if there, it
inserts space between headers and start of text (obachman
3/99)

@example
$T2H_INVISIBLE_MARK = "";
# $T2H_INVISIBLE_MARK = '&#160;';
@end example

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionIso, OptionInclude, OptionInvisible, Options
@section Iso
@cindex ISO8859
@cindex Copyright
@opindex iso
@vindex T2H_USE_ISO
@option{-iso}

if set, ISO8859 characters are used for special symbols
(like Copyright @code{@copyright{}}, etc)

$T2H_USE_ISO = 0;

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionInclude, OptionTopFile, OptionIso, Options
@section Include Direcotry
@vindex Include directories
@opindex I
@vindex T2H_INCLUDE_DIRS
@option{-I}

list directories where @code{@@include} files are searched for
(besides the directory of the doc file) additional
@option{-I} args are add to this list.

@@T2H_INCLUDE_DIRS = (".");

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionTopFile, OptionTocFile, OptionInclude, Options
@section Top File
@cindex Top Level file
@cindex HTML, index.html
@opindex top_file
@vindex T2H_TOP_FILE
@option{-top_file}
uses file of this name for top-level file
extension is manipulated appropriately, if necessary.
If empty, @file{<basename of document>.html} is used
Typically, you would set this to @file{index.html}.

$T2H_TOP_FILE = "";

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionTocFile, OptionFrames, OptionTopFile, Options
@section Table Of content File
@cindex Table of content file
@opindex toc_file
@vindex T2H_TOC_FILE
@option{-toc_file}
uses file of this name for table of contents file extension
is manipulated appropriately, if necessary. If empty,
@file{<basename of document>_toc.html} is used

$T2H_TOC_FILE = "";

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionFrames, OptionMenu, OptionTocFile, Options
@section Frames
@vindex HTML, frames
@vindex HTML 4.0, frames
@opindex frames
@vindex T2H_FRAMES
@option{-frames}
if set, output two additional files which use HTML 4.0
@b{frames}.

$T2H_FRAMES = 0;

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionMenu, OptionNumber, OptionFrames, Options
@section Menu's
@cindex HTML, menu
@cindex Texinfo, menu
@opindex menu
@opindex nomenu
@vindex T2H_SHOW_MENU
@option{-menu} or @option{-nomenu} if set, show the Texinfo
menus

$T2H_SHOW_MENU = 1;

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionNumber, OptionSplit, OptionMenu, Options
@section Number sections
@cindex Section numbering
@opindex number
@opindex nonumber
@vindex T2H_NUMBER_SECTIONS
@option{-number} @option{-nonumber}
if set, number sections and show section names and numbers
in references and menus

@c Just think about it?
@c @defvar $T2H_NUMBER_SECTIONS
@c @c = 1;
@c @end defvar

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionSplit, OptionSectionNavigation, OptionNumber, Options
@section Split
@cindex HTML, split
@cindex File, split
@opindex split
@vindex T2H_SPLIT
@option{-split section|chapter|none}
if set to @strong{section} (resp. @strong{chapter}) create one
@acronym{HTML} file per (sub)section (resp. chapter) and
separate pages for Top, ToC, Overview, Index, Glossary,
About. otherwise, create monolithic @acronym{HTML} file which
contains whole document

#$T2H_SPLIT = 'section';
$T2H_SPLIT = undef;

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionSectionNavigation, OptionSubDir, OptionSplit, Options
@section Section navigation
@cindex HTML, Navigation
@opindex section_navigation
@opindex no-section_navigation
@vindex T2H_SECTION_NAVIGATION
@option{-section_navigation}|
@option{-no-section_navigation}

if set, then navigation panels are printed at the beginning
of each section and, possibly at the end (depending on
whether or not there were more than 
@var{$T2H_WORDS_IN_PAGE} words on page). This is most useful
if you do not want to have section navigation on
@option{-split chapter}

@c @vindex T2H_SECTION_NAVIGATION
@c @defvar $T2H_SECTION_NAVIGATION
@c = 1;
@c @end defvar

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionSubDir, OptionShortExt, OptionSectionNavigation, Options
@section Subdirectory
@cindex Subdirectory
@vindex T2H_SUBDIR
@option{-subdir}
if set put result files in this directory if not set result
files are put into current directory

@c #$T2H_SUBDIR = 'html';
@var{$T2H_SUBDIR} = undef;

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionShortExt, OptionPrefix, OptionSubDir, Options
@section Short extension
@cindex HTML, .htm extension
@cindex HTML, .html extension
@cindex extension, .html
@cindex extension, .htm
@vindex T2H_SHORTEXTN
@opindex short_extn
@option{-short_extn}
If this is set all @acronym{HTML} file will have extension
@file{.htm} instead of @file{.html}. This is helpful when
shipping the document to PC systems.
@var{$T2H_SHORTEXTN} = 0;

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionPrefix, OptionOutput, OptionShortExt, Options
@section Prefix
@cindex Prefix
@vindex T2H_PREFIX
@opindex prefix
@option{-prefix}
Set the output file prefix, prepended to all @file{.html},
@file{.gif} and @file{.pl} files.
By default, this is the basename of the document

@var{$T2H_PREFIX} = "";

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionOutput, OptionShortRef, OptionPrefix, Options
@section Output filename
@cindex Output filename
@cindex Filename, output
@vindex T2H_OUT
@opindex o
@opindex out_file

@option{-o filename}|@option{-out_file}
If set, generate monolithic document output @acronym{HTML}
into @file{filename}.

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionShortRef, OptionIndexSummary, OptionOutput, Options
@section Short Cross References
@cindex References, short
@cindex sections without numbers
@vindex T2H_SHORT_REF
@opindex short_ref
@option{-short_ref}
if set cross-references are given without section numbers

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionIndexSummary, OptionVerbose, OptionShortRef, Options
@section Index Summary
@cindex Index, Summary
@cindex Summary Index
@cindex HTML, Index
@vindex T2H_IDX_SUMMARY
@opindex idx_sum
@option{-idx_sum}
If value is set, then for each @code{@@prinindex $what}
@file{$docu_name_$what.idx} is created which contains lines of the
form @strong{$key\t$ref} sorted alphabetically (case
matters).

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionVerbose, OptionLanguage, OptionIndexSummary, Options
@section Verbose output
@cindex Output, verbose
@cindex Verbose output
@cindex Debugging, verbose output
@vindex T2H_VERBOSE
@opindex verbose
@option{-verbose}
if set, chatter about what we are doing.

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionLanguage, OptionL2H, OptionVerbose, Options
@section Language Support
@cindex Language Support
@cindex Support different languages
@vindex $T2H_LANG
@vindex $T2H_WORDS
@opindex lang
@option{-lang}
For page titles use
@code{$T2H_WORDS->@{$T2H_LANG@}->@{...@}} as title. To add
a new languages, supply list of titles (see
@var{$T2H_WORDS}). and use ISO 639 language codes (see e.g.
perl module @file{Locale-Codes-1.02.tar.gz} for
definitions)

If you don't give a @option{-lang} then we got it from the
Texinfo source fille (@@documentlanguage
@c Put a table with the language codes here!
@c Or better put a reference into the Texinfo
@c Manual, which has a table of ISO 639-Codes.
@c
@c Currently the @xref etc. does not work with
@c external documents, cause we don't know
@c reference (anchor) value or there is no way
@c to get it.
@c The following reference does only work correctly
@c in Info!!!
@pxref{documentlanguage,,,Texinfo}). If there is no
@code{@@documentlanguage} we use the default @code{en} for
the language.
@c
@c put some information about Month names etc. here
@c $MONTH_NAMES !!
@c Suplemental should be naming scheme for variables in
@c different languages (MONTH_NAMES_DE etc.)
@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionL2H, , OptionLanguage, Options
@section La@TeX{}2HTML for @code{@@math} and @code{@@tex}
@cindex La@TeX{}2HTML
@cindex Conversion of @@math and @@tex
@cindex @@tex
@cindex @@math
@vindex T2H_L2H
@opindex l2h
@option{-l2h}
if set, uses @command{latex2html} for generation of math
content.

@menu
* OptionL2HL2H::    Where to find La@TeX{}2HTML.
* OptionL2HSkip::   Skip calling La@TeX{}2HTML.
* OptionL2Htmp::    Temporary files for La@TeX{}2HTML.
@end menu

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionL2HL2H, OptionL2HSkip, OptionL2H, OptionL2H
@subsection Where to find @command{latex2html}
@cindex location, La@TeX{}2HTML
@cindex La@TeX{}2HTML, location
@vindex T2H_L2H_L2H
@opindex l2h_l2h
@option{-l2h_l2h}
name/location of @command{latex2html} progam.

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionL2HSkip, OptionL2Htmp, OptionL2HL2H, OptionL2H
@subsection Skip calling La@TeX{}2HTML
@cindex La@TeX{}2HTML, skip calling
@vindex T2H_L2H_SKIP
@opindex l2h_skip
@option{-l2h_skip}
if set, skips actual call to @command{atex2html} tries to
reuse previously generated content, instead.

@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node OptionL2Htmp, , OptionL2HSkip, OptionL2H
@subsection Temporary files for La@TeX{}2HTML
@cindex Temporary, La@TeX{}2HTML
@cindex La@TeX{}2HTML, Temporary files
@vindex T2H_L2H_TMP
@opindex l2h_tmp
@option{-l2h_tmp}
if set, l2h uses this directory for temporarary files. The
path leading to this directory may not contain a dot (i.e.,
a "."), otherwise, l2h will fail
