@c
@c This file is part of the ``Texinfo to HTML Converter'' manual
@c which is part of the ``texi2html'' distribution.
@c
@c License:
@c    Copyright (C) 1999, 2000  Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c
@c    This program is free software; you can redistribute it
@c    and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public
@c    License as published by the Free Software Foundation;
@c    either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any
@c    later version.
@c
@c    This program is distributed in the hope that it will be
@c    useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied
@c    warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
@c    PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more
@c    details.
@c
@c    You should have received a copy of the GNU General
@c    Public License along with this program; if not, write to
@c    the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite
@c    330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA
@c
@c
@c Revisions:
@c $Id: reference.texi,v 1.2 2001/05/01 14:43:48 dprice Exp $
@c
@c Author:
@c   Karl Heinz Marbaise <khmarbaise@gmx.de>
@c
@c Description:
@c   Here you can find the description on all
@c   subs in the original Perl file.
@c
@c ========================================================
@appendix Function Reference

@menu
* Refptocframe::           Print ToC Frame.
* Refpphead::              Print page head.
@end menu

@c Global variables:
@c T2H_USER which is created throught main part
@c (texi2html.pl)
@c You can use it. (On Windows? On Unix ?)
@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node Refptocframe,Refpphead,,Reference
@appendixsec Print ToC Frame


@defun T2H_DEFAULT_print_toc_frame (FileName)
@sp 1
Description of the subroutine.
What does it do? Which parameters it needs etc.
@end defun


@c --------------------------------------------------------
@node Refpphead,,Refptocframe,Reference
@appendixsec Print Page Head
@defun T2H_DEFAULT_print_page_head (FileName)
@sp 1
Description of the subroutine.
What does it do? Which parameters it needs etc.
@end defun
