\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename nodetest_utf8.info
@documentencoding utf8
@node Top,Umlaut,(dir)
@top
@menu
* Umlaut::               Umlaut.


Another Heading


* acute accent::         acute accent.
* grave accent::         grave accent.
* circumflex accent::    circumflex accent.
* tilde accent::         tilde accent.
* cedilla accent::       cedilla accent.
* rest::                 rest @@aa@{@} etc.
@end menu
@c
@node Umlaut,,Top,Top
@chapter Umlaut
@menu
* ä::    ä.
* ë::    ë.
* ï::    ï.
* ö::    ö.
* ü::    ü.
* ÿ::    ÿ.
* Ä::    Ä.
* Ë::    Ë.
* Ï::    Ï.
* Ö::    Ö.
* Ü::    Ü.
* @ss{}::    @ss{}.
* no section::  Node without sectioning command.
@end menu
@c
@node ä,,,Umlaut
@section ä
ref to ç @ref{ç}.
@node ë,,,Umlaut
@section ë
@node ï,,,Umlaut 
@section ï

before footnote @xref{footanchor}.

@footnote{@anchor{footanchor}}

after footnote @xref{footanchor}.

@node ö,,,Umlaut
@section ö
Ref to an anchor at the end of the doc 
(@pxref{é-o, , there is an o-é could there be an @^{@dotless{i}}}).
@node ü,,,Umlaut
@section ü
Another ref to an anchor (@pxref{x-spot, ,}).
@node ÿ,,,Umlaut
@section ÿ
This is a ref to a node (@pxref{à, ,à}).

@node Ä,,,Umlaut
@section Ä

Now a ref to a node without sectionning command, 
no text (@pxref{no section, , }).
With text (@pxref{no section, ,but a text }).

@node Ë,,,Umlaut
@section Ë
@node Ï,,,Umlaut
@section Ï
@node Ö,,,Umlaut
@section Ö
@node Ü,,,Umlaut
@section Ü
@node @ss{},,,Umlaut
@section @ss{}
@node no section,,,Umlaut
This is a node without sectioning command.
@c
@node acute accent,,Top,Top
@chapter acute accent
@menu
* @'a::    @'a.
* é::    é.
* @'i::    @'i.
* @'o::    @'o.
* @'u::    @'u.
* @'y::    @'y.
* @'A::    @'A.
* @'E::    @'E.
* @'I::    @'I.
* @'O::    @'O.
* @'U::    @'U.
* @'Y::    @'Y.
@end menu
@c
@node @'a,,,acute accent
@section @'a
With brace @'{a}. Testing ' " ` ^.
@node é,,,acute accent
@section é
@node @'i,,,acute accent
@section @'i
@node @'o,,,acute accent
@section @'o
@node @'u,,,acute accent
@section @'u
@node @'y,,,acute accent
@section @'y
@node @'A,,,acute accent
@section @'A
@node @'E,,,acute accent
@section @'E
@node @'I,,,acute accent
@section @'I
@node @'O,,,acute accent
@section @'O
@node @'U,,,acute accent
@section @'U
@node @'Y,,,acute accent
@section @'Y
This is a ref to ü (@pxref{ü, ,ü}).
Another one, with node only (@pxref{ü, ,}).

@ignore
An ignored sentence.
@end ignore 

@c
@node grave accent,,Top,Top
@chapter grave accent
@menu
* à::    à.
* è::    è.
* @`i::    @`i.
* with brace @`{i}::    @`{i}.
* with dotless @`{@dotless{i}}::   @`{@dotless{i}}.
* @`o::    @`o.
* ù::    ù.
* @`A::    @`A.
* @`E::    @`E.
* @`I::    @`I.
* @`O::    @`O.
* @`U::    @`U.
@end menu
@c
@node à,,,grave accent
@section à
@node è,,,grave accent
@section è
@node @`i,,,grave accent
@section @`i
@node with brace @`{i},,,grave accent
@section @`{i}
@node with dotless @`{@dotless{i}},,,grave accent
@section @`{@dotless{i}}
@node @`o,,,grave accent
@section @`o
@node ù,,,grave accent
@section ù
@node @`A,,,grave accent
@section @`A
@node @`E,,,grave accent
@section @`E
@node @`I,,,grave accent
@section @`I
@node @`O,,,grave accent
@section @`O
@node @`U,,,grave accent
@section @`U
@c
@node circumflex accent,,Top,Top
@chapter circumflex accent
@menu
* â::    â.
* ê::    ê.
* î::    î.
* ô::    ô.
* û::    û.
* Â::    Â.
* Ê::    Ê.
* Î::    Î.
* Ô::    Ô.
* Û::    Û.
@end menu
@c
@node â,,,circumflex accent
@section â
@node ê,,,circumflex accent
@section ê
@node î,,,circumflex accent
@section î
@node ô,,,circumflex accent
@section ô
@node û,,,circumflex accent
@section û
@node Â,,,circumflex accent
@section Â
@node Ê,,,circumflex accent
@section Ê
@node Î,,,circumflex accent
@section Î
@node Ô,,,circumflex accent
@section Ô
@node Û,,,circumflex accent
@section Û
@c
@node tilde accent,,Top,Top
@chapter tilde accent
@menu
* @~a::    @~a.
* @~n::    @~n.
* @~o::    @~o.
* @~A::    @~A.
* @~O::    @~O.
@end menu
@c
@node @~a,,,tilde accent
@section @~a
@node @~n,,,tilde accent
@section @~n
@node @~o,,,tilde accent
@section @~o
@node @~A,,,tilde accent
@section @~A
@node @~O,,,tilde accent
@section @~O
This marks the @anchor{x-spot}spot.
A second one with accented char @anchor{é-o}.
@c
@node cedilla accent,,Top,Top
@chapter cedilla accent
@menu
* ç::    ç.
* @,{C}::    @,{C}.
@end menu
@c
@node ç,,,cedilla accent
@section ç
@node @,{C},,,cedilla accent
@section @,{C}
@c
@node rest,,Top,Top
@chapter rest
@menu
* @aa{}::  @aa{}.
* @ae{}::  @ae{}.
* @oe{}::  @oe{}.
* @AA{}::  @AA{}.
* @AE{}::  @AE{}.
* @OE{}::  @OE{}.
* @l{}::  @l{}.
* @o{}::  @o{}.
* @L{}::  @L{}.
* @O{}::  @O{}.
* @H{a}::  @H{a}.
* @u{a}::  @u{a}.
* @v{a}::  @v{a}.
* @udotaccent{a}::  @udotaccent{a} udotaccent.
* @dotaccent{a}::  @dotaccent{a} dotaccent.
* @ringaccent{a}::  @ringaccent{a} ringaccent.
* @tieaccent{a}::  @tieaccent{a} tieaccent.
* @ubaraccent{a}::  @ubaraccent{a} ubaraccent.
* @dotless{i}::  @dotless{i} dotless i.
* @dotless{j}::  @dotless{j} dotless j.
* @comma{}::     @comma{} comma
@end menu
@c
@node @aa{},,,rest
@section @aa{}
@node @ae{},,,rest
@section @ae{}
@node @oe{},,,rest
@section @oe{}
@node @AA{},,,rest
@section @AA{}
@node @AE{},,,rest
@section @AE{}
@node @OE{},,,rest
@section @OE{}
@node @l{},,,rest
@section @l{}
@node @o{},,,rest
@section @o{}
@node @L{},,,rest
@section @L{}
@node @O{},,,rest
@section @O{}
@node @H{a},,,rest
@section @H{a}
@node @u{a},,,rest
@section @u{a}
@node @v{a},,,rest
@section @v{a}
@node @udotaccent{a},,,rest
@section @udotaccent{a}
Test udotaccent.
@node @dotaccent{a},,,rest
@section @dotaccent{a}
Test dotaccent.
@node @ringaccent{a},,,rest
@section @ringaccent{a}
@node @tieaccent{a},,,rest
@section @tieaccent{a}
@node @ubaraccent{a},,,rest
@section @ubaraccent{a}
@node @dotless{i},,,rest
@section @dotless{i}
@node @dotless{j},,,rest
@section @dotless{j}
        
        @dots{}

	@enddots{}

	@exclamdown{}

	@questiondown{}

	@pounds{}

	@@- : @-
	@@ followed by end of line: @
	@@ followed by tab: @	
	@@ followed by space @ 
	@@*: @* and text followin @@*.

@node @comma{},,,rest
@section @comma{}
@contents
@bye
