\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c
@c Created:
@c    Fri Jan 22 1999
@c
@c Revisions:
@c $Log: umlaut.texi,v $
@c Revision 1.1  2003/09/01 15:08:15  pertusus
@c         * texi2html.init, texi2html.pl: hide m_cedilla.
@c         new handling of definition commands, with a specification of the
@c         definition line parsing.
@c         get HTML attributes from hash values of %format_map and %style_map.
@c         Simplify the handling of tables. The default is to use %format_map
@c         or otherwise a user defined function, $table_list.
@c         All the css commands are in %css_map. 'pre_style' in $complex_formats
@c         is taken from %css_map.
@c         handle @sp.
@c         Remove $Texi2HTML::STOC_LINES (use $Texi2HTML::OVERVIEW), remove
@c         $Texi2HTML::TOC (use $Texi2HTML::TOC_LINES), remove $T2H_TOP.
@c         use references on arrays everywhere (instead of arrays) for
@c         Texi2HTML::OVERVIEW and Texi2HTML::TOC_LINES.
@c         Use OVERVIEW consistently.
@c         use $docu_top when needed, instead of $docu_name.$docu_ext, which
@c         is wrong if -o is used.
@c         prepare index entries label text in main program.
@c         rewrite from scratch most of the function in .init files to put
@c         them in the public domain.
@c         expand macros in macro arguments.
@c         \ protects @end macro in macros body. This may be wrong.
@c         ignore space and newline following a region opening command.
@c         rename -css-file to -css-include.
@c         Add 'This' to the hashes for buttons, icons and so on.
@c         Add option -toc-links, create links from headings to toc entries
@c         with 9 lines from
@c         Martin Herbert Dietze <martin@the-little-red-haired-girl.org>
@c         macros are expanded in macro arguments, taking care of context (in
@c         @verbatim, @ignore, @comment...).
@c         Don't remove empty lines from output.
@c         Reenable handling of -idx-sum.
@c         * Tests/*: add tests for macros expansion in macro arguments, and
@c         for command line option style which are not default.
@c         * examples/*: use code in the public domain.
@c         In makeinfo.init use makeinfo style for index formatting.
@c
@c Revision 1.1.1.1  2001/04/29 07:23:19  dprice
@c Initial import of texi2html
@c
@c Revision 1.1  2000/08/14 18:10:24  texi2htm
@c - new command line switch (Testing purpose) -def_table
@c   to show new layout for @def commands.
@c - changes for new doc directory.
@c - much changes in documentation.
@c
@c Revision 1.3  1999/02/23 15:07:27  khm
@c - UPdated
@c
@c Revision 1.2  1999/02/10 21:54:51  khm
@c - Neuen Patch
@c
@c Revision 1.1  1999/02/04 17:16:23  khm
@c - txi-de.tex geaendert Of => of
@c
@c Revision 1.2  1999/02/03 13:47:54  khm
@c - ChangeLog upgedated.
@c
@c Revision 1.1  1999/02/03 12:59:00  khm
@c - Neue Version txi-de eingechecked wegen copyright usw.
@c
@c
@setfilename umlaut.info
@documentlanguage de
@c @documentlanguage zv
@settitle Test for Umlaute, accent etc.
@setchapternewpage on
@footnotestyle separate
@ifset shorttitlepage-enabled
@shorttitlepage ShortTitle
@end ifset
@titlepage
@title Title
@subtitle SubTitle
@author @copyright{}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} Who it is@*
@sp 2
@end titlepage
@page
@chapter This is what you get
Copright Sign: @copyright{} @*
Pound Sign: @pounds{} @*
Minus Zeichen: @minus{} @*
TeX Logo: @TeX{}@*
dots@{@}: @dots{}@*
bullet@{@}:@bullet{}@*
Vertical Bar:@*
|

valid umlaut
@"a @"e @"i @"o @"u @"y
@"A @"E @"I @"O @"U


Non valid umlaut:@*
@"X @"x @"Q @"Y


Special characters in HTML:@*
 < > &


acute accent:@*
@'a @'e @'i @'o @'u @'y
@'A @'E @'I @'O @'U @'Y

invalid acute accent:@*
@'z @'q @'r
@'Z @'Q @'R

valid Cedilla:@*
@,{c} @,{C}


non valid Cedilla:@*
@,{H} @,{h}

macron:@*
@=o

I don't know any invalid macron:@*


valid circumflex:@*
@^a @^e @^i @^o @^u
@^A @^E @^I @^O @^U 


invalid circumflex:@*
@^z @^r @^t @^k
@^Z @^R @^T @^K


grave accent:@*
@`a @`e @`i @`o @`u
@`A @`E @`I @`O @`U


invalid grave accent:@*
@`z @`m @`p



tilde accent:@*
@~a @~n @~o
@~A @~O

invalid tilde accent:@*
@~Z @~s



@dotaccent{o}
@H{o}
@ringaccent{o}
@tieaccent{oo}
@u{o}
@ubaraccent{o}
@udotaccent{o}
@v{o}
@exclamdown{}
@questiondown{}
@aa{} @AA{}
@ae{} @AE{}
@dotless{i}
@dotless{j}
@l{} @L{}
@o{} @O{}
@oe{} @OE{}
@ss{}

What about @@url and @@uref

@url{http://www.fido.de/~kama}

Referenz:@*
@uref{http://www.fido.de/~kama}

Referenz mit Display Text:@*
@uref{http://www.fido.de/~kama, Second Argument of uref}

Referenz mit Display Text and special:@*
@uref{http://www.fido.de/~kama, Second Argument of uref, Third Argument of uref}

Email:@*
@email{kama@@hippo.fido.de}

Email mit display:@*
@email{kama@@hippo.fido.de, Anzeige der email Adrese}
@c I don't need any contents.
@contents
@bye

