\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-

@node Top,First node,(dir)
@top Tests
@menu
* First node::    node 1
* description: node @'{a}.    node with braces
* node: (manual)A node. node in another manual

a verbatim in menu comment @verbatim verbatim on same line than @verbatim

bidule

@end verbatim

* node d@'a::       node without braces
@end menu

@node First node
@chapter first node chapter

ref to a non existing node@ref{bidule}.

a 2 paragraphs sample @samp{in first paragraph

in second}.

a 3 paragraphs sample @samp{in first paragraph

in second

in third}.

Unknown macro @unknown{ first paragraph

second paragraph}

@unknown2{ first paragraph

second paragraph

third}



Unknown thing @thing{}



A list with bullet
Before itemize, in that case @@bullet isn'right, one needs @@bullet@{@} (in info) @itemize @bullet{} @c segfault <- @item on the same line that itemize
@item on the same line than item
some text
@item
more text @end  itemize

A list with text before first @@item:

@itemize @bullet
text @item more
text
@end itemize

@ifnottex
a verbatim, not first on the line @verbatim text following @verbatim

text


@@@@ @ text before @end  verbatim @end verbatim Text following end verbatim, must be exactly one space 
between end and verbatim. @@end verbatim doesn't need to begin at beginning 
of line.
@end ifnottex

In tex, @@end verbatim must be on its own on a line.

A verbatim with begin and end on its own line
@verbatim
verbatim @samp{item}

@end verbatim


@ifnottex
Now html  @html 
<p>
some html </p> 
@end html bidule ignored

@@end html begins the line, and there must be exactly one space between @@end
and html and thing following @@end html are ignored in info. Strangely
the empty line following @@end html is ignored but spaces are inserted.
@end ifnottex

Now html valid for @TeX{}  @html 
<p>
some html </p> 
@end html 
Some text one the line following @@end html

And html on it's own line

@html
<p> an htmp paragraph</p>
@end html

@ifnottex
Now tex on the same line @tex some

$$ \chi^2 = \sum_{i=1}^N
          \left(y_i - (a + b x_i)
	  \over \sigma_i\right)^2 $$
		    

@end tex bidule
Some text one the line following @@end tex
@end ifnottex

Now tex on the following line, valid fot tex (with @@end tex on a line).
@tex some

tex \TeX 
@end tex

Same that @@html (but empty following line not ignored).

@ifnottex
ignore @ignore ignored

@end ignore bidule ignore
@end ifnottex

Ignore is the same than @@html.

Now ifnothtml on same line @ifnothtml text following ifnothtml

text following an empty line
text before end ifnothtml @end  ifnothtml

@@end ifnothtml doesn't need to begin the line, and there can be more
than one space between @@end and ifnothtml, but nothing more
on the line.

Text on the line before ifnothtml with text following,
@ifnothtml text following ifnothtml,
@end  ifnothtml
Text on the line following ifnothtml.

Text on the line before ifnothtml without text following,
@ifnothtml
some text on a line between ifnothtml and end  ifnothtml,
@end  ifnothtml
Text on the line following ifnothtml.

Text on the line before ifnothtml,
@ifnothtml
@end  ifnothtml
Text on the line following empty ifnothtml


@TeX{} has problems with the ftable.

@ifnottex
an ftable on same line @ftable @bullet
@item fun1
@itemx fun2
fun1 et fun2 @item more fun
text on the same line than end   @end  ftable
works like @@ifnothtml
@end ifnottex

@item outside format.

@tab outside format.

@multitable {@samp{bidule}}
truc before table beginning @item first cell @tab ignored cell
@itemx second row
@end multitable

before bad  multitable @multitable 6 7
@item 1-1 @tab 1-2 @item@tab@item 3-1 @tab 3-2 @end multitable

right multitable
@multitable @columnfractions 6 7
@item 1-1 @tab 1-2 @item@tab@item 3-1 @tab 3-2 @end multitable

multitable beginning with @@tab
@multitable {@samp{@verb{.something.}}} {sec}
@tab after first tab 
@item new line
@end multitable

A flushright
@flushright some text flushed right
@end flushright

A center @center Centered line
And a center after empty line

@center centered line after empty line

And a center at end of line @center
And an empty center @center   

An empty flushright @flushright

@end flushright

A verb follows:

@verb{' a little

very little
verb '}

another with space as delimiter

@verb{ what@@ }

@@verb followed by end of line seems incorrect.
Now verb delimited with *, with an empty line, a comment and @@samp:

@verb{*with
verb @c comment

and samp @samp{text }
*}



@node node @'{a}, node d@'a, First node, Top
@chapter node 'a with braces
In the node with braces

A footnote with an empty line within.
@footnote{with empty line

before before} 

Now a ref with a footnote within, there aren't 2 paragraphes in the footnote
in that case in info. tex doesn't like the paragraph break in the ref
@ifnottex
@ref{First 
node, within ref a footnote @footnote{with empty line

before before}}.

Conversely, a ref in a footnote
@footnote{ This is a ref @ref{First node} }


@end ifnottex

Some @@verbatim, @@verb and @@ignore within an xref, very hard for @TeX{}:
@ifnottex
@xref{First node, 
@verbatim

some
verbatim   @@
text
within an xref

@end verbatim


and now verb delimited with * with an empty line a comment and @@samp
@verb{*with
verb @c comment

and samp @samp{text }
next line
*}

last ignored sentence
@ignore
ignore me causing problems to makeinfo 
@end ignore

}.
@end ifnottex

@xref{First node,
no verb}.

@node node d@'a,, node @'{a}, Top
@chapter node 'a without braces
@menu
* node::       node 
@end menu

@node node,,,
@section node

A node with gggggggg
before example @example after example

the example
before end example  @end  example 
after end example


@contents
@bye
