\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c
@c It is not possible to test for @,{c} in 
@c nodename cause makeinfo can not
@c handle cedilla's in node names. A cedilla
@c has a comma which was recognized a as
@c delimiter between node parts (next,previous etc.)
@setfilename nodetest.info
@node Top,Umlaut,(dir)
@top
@menu
* Umlaut::               Umlaut.


Another Heading


* acute accent::         acute accent.
* grave accent::         grave accent.
* circumflex accent::    circumflex accent.
* tilde accent::         tilde accent.
* cedilla accent::       cedilla accent.
* rest::                 rest @@aa@{@} etc.
@end menu
@c
@node Umlaut,,Top,Top
@chapter Umlaut
@menu
* @"a::    @"a.
* @"e::    @"e.
* @"i::    @"i.
* with brace @"{i}::    @"{i}.
* with dotless @"{@dotless{i}}::   @"{@dotless{i}}.
* @"o::    @"o.
* @"u::    @"u.
* @"y::    @"y.
* @"A::    @"A.
* @"E::    @"E.
* @"I::    @"I.
* @"O::    @"O.
* @"U::    @"U.
* @ss{}::    @ss{}.
* no section::  Node without sectioning command.
@end menu
@c
@node @"a,,,Umlaut
@section @"a
ref to @,{c} @ref{@,{c}}.
@node @"e,,,Umlaut
@section @"e
@node @"i,,,Umlaut 
@section @"i
@node with brace @"{i},,,Umlaut
@section With brace @"{i}
@node with dotless @"{@dotless{i}},,,Umlaut
@section With dotless @"{@dotless{i}}
@iftex
ref to setref @ref{ref}.
@end iftex
@node @"o,,,Umlaut
@section @"o
Ref to an anchor at the end of the doc 
(@pxref{@'o-o, , there is an o-@'o could there be an @^{@dotless{i}}}).
@node @"u,,,Umlaut
@section @"u
Another ref to an anchor (@pxref{x-spot, ,}).
@node @"y,,,Umlaut
@section @"y
This is a ref to a node (@pxref{@'U, ,@'U}).

@node @"A,,,Umlaut
@section @"A

Now a ref to a node without sectionning command, 
no text (@pxref{no section, , }).
With text (@pxref{no section, ,but a text }).

@node @"E,,,Umlaut
@section @"E
@node @"I,,,Umlaut
@section @"I
@node @"O,,,Umlaut
@section @"O
@node @"U,,,Umlaut
@section @"U
@node @ss{},,,Umlaut
@section @ss{}
@node no section,,,Umlaut
This is a node without sectioning command.
@c
@node acute accent,,Top,Top
@chapter acute accent
@menu
* @'a::    @'a.
* @'e::    @'e.
* @'i::    @'i.
* @'o::    @'o.
* @'u::    @'u.
* @'y::    @'y.
* @'A::    @'A.
* @'E::    @'E.
* @'I::    @'I.
* @'O::    @'O.
* @'U::    @'U.
* @'Y::    @'Y.
@end menu
@c
@node @'a,,,acute accent
@section @'a
With brace @'{a}. Testing ' " ` ^.
@node @'e,,,acute accent
@section @'e
@node @'i,,,acute accent
@section @'i
@node @'o,,,acute accent
@section @'o
@node @'u,,,acute accent
@section @'u
@node @'y,,,acute accent
@section @'y
@node @'A,,,acute accent
@section @'A
@node @'E,,,acute accent
@section @'E
@node @'I,,,acute accent
@section @'I
@node @'O,,,acute accent
@section @'O
@node @'U,,,acute accent
@section @'U
@node @'Y,,,acute accent
@section @'Y
This is a ref to @"u (@pxref{@"u, ,@"u}).
Another one, with node only (@pxref{@"a, ,}).

@ignore
An ignored sentence.
@end ignore 

@c
@node grave accent,,Top,Top
@chapter grave accent
@menu
* @`a::    @`a.
* @`e::    @`e.
* @`i::    @`i.
* with brace @`{i}::    @`{i}.
* with dotless @`{@dotless{i}}::   @`{@dotless{i}}.
* @`o::    @`o.
* @`u::    @`u.
* @`A::    @`A.
* @`E::    @`E.
* @`I::    @`I.
* @`O::    @`O.
* @`U::    @`U.
@end menu
@c
@node @`a,,,grave accent
@section @`a
@node @`e,,,grave accent
@section @`e
@node @`i,,,grave accent
@section @`i
@node with brace @`{i},,,grave accent
@section @`{i}
@node with dotless @`{@dotless{i}},,,grave accent
@section @`{@dotless{i}}
@node @`o,,,grave accent
@section @`o
@node @`u,,,grave accent
@section @`u
@node @`A,,,grave accent
@section @`A
@node @`E,,,grave accent
@section @`E
@node @`I,,,grave accent
@section @`I
@node @`O,,,grave accent
@section @`O
@node @`U,,,grave accent
@section @`U
@c
@node circumflex accent,,Top,Top
@chapter circumflex accent
@menu
* @^a::    @^a.
* @^e::    @^e.
* @^i::    @^i.
* with brace @^{i}::    @^{i}.
* with dotless @^{@dotless{i}}::   @^{@dotless{i}}.
* @^o::    @^o.
* @^u::    @^u.
* @^A::    @^A.
* @^E::    @^E.
* @^I::    @^I.
* @^O::    @^O.
* @^U::    @^U.
@end menu
@c
@node @^a,,,circumflex accent
@section @^a
@node @^e,,,circumflex accent
@section @^e
@node @^i,,,circumflex accent
@section @^i
@node with brace @^{i},,,circumflex accent
@section @^{i}
Test @@^@{i@}.
@node with dotless @^{@dotless{i}},,,circumflex accent
@section @^{@dotless{i}}
Test @@^@{@@dotless@{i@}@}.
@node @^o,,,circumflex accent
@section @^o
@node @^u,,,circumflex accent
@section @^u
@node @^A,,,circumflex accent
@section @^A
@node @^E,,,circumflex accent
@section @^E
@node @^I,,,circumflex accent
@section @^I
@node @^O,,,circumflex accent
@section @^O
@node @^U,,,circumflex accent
@section @^U
@c
@node tilde accent,,Top,Top
@chapter tilde accent
@menu
* @~a::    @~a.
* @~n::    @~n.
* @~o::    @~o.
* @~A::    @~A.
* @~O::    @~O.
@end menu
@c
@node @~a,,,tilde accent
@section @~a
@node @~n,,,tilde accent
@section @~n
@node @~o,,,tilde accent
@section @~o
@node @~A,,,tilde accent
@section @~A
@node @~O,,,tilde accent
@section @~O
This marks the @anchor{x-spot}spot.
A second one with accented char @anchor{@'o-o}.
@c
@node cedilla accent,,Top,Top
@chapter cedilla accent
@menu
* @,{c}::    @,{c}.
* @,{C}::    @,{C}.
@end menu
@c
@node @,{c},,,cedilla accent
@section @,{c}
@node @,{C},,,cedilla accent
@section @,{C}
@c
@node rest,,Top,Top
@chapter rest
@menu
* @aa{}::  @aa{}.
* @ae{}::  @ae{}.
* @oe{}::  @oe{}.
* @AA{}::  @AA{}.
* @AE{}::  @AE{}.
* @OE{}::  @OE{}.
* @l{}::  @l{}.
* @o{}::  @o{}.
* @L{}::  @L{}.
* @O{}::  @O{}.
* @H{a}::  @H{a}.
* @u{a}::  @u{a}.
* @v{a}::  @v{a}.
* @udotaccent{a}::  @udotaccent{a} udotaccent.
* @dotaccent{a}::  @dotaccent{a} dotaccent.
* @ringaccent{a}::  @ringaccent{a} ringaccent.
* @tieaccent{a}::  @tieaccent{a} tieaccent.
* @ubaraccent{a}::  @ubaraccent{a} ubaraccent.
* @dotless{i}::  @dotless{i} dotless i.
* @dotless{j}::  @dotless{j} dotless j.
@end menu
@c
@node @aa{},,,rest
@section @aa{}
@node @ae{},,,rest
@section @ae{}
@node @oe{},,,rest
@section @oe{}
@node @AA{},,,rest
@section @AA{}
@node @AE{},,,rest
@section @AE{}
@node @OE{},,,rest
@section @OE{}
@node @l{},,,rest
@section @l{}
@node @o{},,,rest
@section @o{}
@node @L{},,,rest
@section @L{}
@node @O{},,,rest
@section @O{}
@node @H{a},,,rest
@section @H{a}
@node @u{a},,,rest
@section @u{a}
@node @v{a},,,rest
@section @v{a}
@node @udotaccent{a},,,rest
@section @udotaccent{a}
Test udotaccent.
@node @dotaccent{a},,,rest
@section @dotaccent{a}
Test dotaccent.
@node @ringaccent{a},,,rest
@section @ringaccent{a}
@node @tieaccent{a},,,rest
@section @tieaccent{a}
@node @ubaraccent{a},,,rest
@section @ubaraccent{a}
@node @dotless{i},,,rest
@section @dotless{i}
@node @dotless{j},,,rest
@section @dotless{j}
        
        @dots{}

	@enddots{}

	@exclamdown{}

	@questiondown{}

	@pounds{}

@contents
@bye
