@c
@c This file is part of the ``Texinfo to HTML Converter'' manual
@c which is part of the ``texi2html'' distribution.
@c
@c License:
@c    Copyright (C) 1999, 2000  Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c
@c    This program is free software; you can redistribute it
@c    and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public
@c    License as published by the Free Software Foundation;
@c    either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any
@c    later version.
@c
@c    This program is distributed in the hope that it will be
@c    useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied
@c    warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
@c    PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more
@c    details.
@c
@c    You should have received a copy of the GNU General
@c    Public License along with this program; if not, write to
@c    the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite
@c    330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA
@c
@c
@c Revisions:
@c $Id: ifo.texi,v 1.1 2003/02/03 16:10:29 pertusus Exp $
@c
@c Author:
@c   Karl Heinz Marbaise <khmarbaise@gmx.de>
@c
@c Description:
@c   Here you can find the description on the
@c   initialization files options.
@c
@c --------------------------------------------------------
@section Initialization file options
This section describes in detail all options that can be used
only in the initialization file (@file{texi2html.init}),
and cannot be specified on the command line.
This means the only way to change those
options is first to copy the original @file{texi2html.init}
to e.g.@: @file{texi2html.init.myown} and make changes to fit
your needs.

@menu
* IFOnumber::             Number sectioning.
* IFOmenu::               Avoid menu redundancy.
* IFOCenterImage::        Center Image.
* IFOExampleIndentCell::  Example Indent Cell.
* IFOSampleIndentCell::   Sample Indent Cell.
* IFOSmallFontSize::      Small Font Size.
* IFOTopHeading::         Top Heading.
* IFOIndexChapter::       Index Chapter.
* IFOSplitIndex::         Split Index.
* IFOhrefDirInsteadFile:: HREF Dir Instead file.
@end menu

@c +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-
@node IFOnumber, IFOmenu, IFOs, IFOs
@subsection Number sections.
@vindex T2H_NUMBER_SECTIONS
@vindex T2H_NODE_NAME_IN_MENU
if set, and @var{$T2H_NUMBER_SECTIONS} is set, then use node
names in menu entries, instead of section names

@var{$T2H_NODE_NAME_IN_MENU} = 0;

@c +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-
@node IFOmenu, IFOCenterImage, IFOnumber, IFOs
@subsection Avoid menu redundancy
@c not sure if correct?
@cindex menu, redundancy
@vindex T2H_AVOID_MENU_REDUNDANCY
If set, and menu entry equals menu description, then do not print
menu description.  Likewise, if node name equals entry name, do
not print entry name.
@var{$T2H_AVOID_MENU_REDUNDANCY} = 1;

@c +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-
@node IFOCenterImage, IFOExampleIndentCell, IFOmenu, IFOs
@subsection Center Image
@cindex images, center
@vindex T2H_CENTER_IMAGE
if set, center @@image by default
otherwise, do not center by default
@var{$T2H_CENTER_IMAGE} = 1;

@c +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-
@node IFOExampleIndentCell, IFOSampleIndentCell, IFOCenterImage, IFOs
@subsection Example Indent Cell
@cindex example, indentation
@vindex T2H_EXAMPLE_INDENT_CELL
used as indentation for block enclosing command
@code{@@example}, etc If not empty, must be enclosed in
@code{<td></td>}
@var{$T2H_EXAMPLE_INDENT_CELL} = '<td>&nbsp;</td>';

@c +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-
@node IFOSampleIndentCell, IFOSmallFontSize, IFOExampleIndentCell, IFOs
@subsection Small Example Indent
@cindex example, small indent
@vindex T2H_SMALL_EXAMPLE_INDENT_CELL
same as above, only for @code{@@small}
$T2H_SMALL_EXAMPLE_INDENT_CELL = "<td>&nbsp;</td>";

@c +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-
@node IFOSmallFontSize, IFOTopHeading, IFOSampleIndentCell, IFOs
@subsection Small Font Size
@cindex Font Size, small
@vindex T2H_SMALL_FONT_SIZE
# font size for @@small
$T2H_SMALL_FONT_SIZE = "-1";

@c +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-
@node IFOTopHeading, IFOIndexChapter, IFOSmallFontSize, IFOs
@subsection Top Heading
@vindex T2H_TOP_HEADING
if non-empty, and no @code{@@..heading} appeared in Top
@c here should be a reference to Texinfo Manual
@c @@heading ??
node, then use this as header for top node/section,
otherwise use value of  @code{@@settitle} or
@code{@@shorttitle} (in that order)
$T2H_TOP_HEADING = "";

@c +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-
@node IFOIndexChapter, IFOSplitIndex, IFOTopHeading, IFOs
@subsection Index Chapter
@cindex Chapter, Index
@vindex T2H_INDEX_CHAPTER
if set, use this chapter for @strong{Index} button, else
use first chapter whose name matches @strong{index} (case insensitive)
$T2H_INDEX_CHAPTER = "";

@c +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-
@node IFOSplitIndex, IFOhrefDirInsteadFile, IFOIndexChapter, IFOs
@subsection Split Index
@cindex Index, split
@vindex T2H_SPLIT_INDEX
if set and @var{$T2H_SPLIT} is set, then split index pages
at the next letter after they have more than that many
entries

$T2H_SPLIT_INDEX = 100;

@c +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-
@node IFOhrefDirInsteadFile, , IFOSplitIndex, IFOs
@subsection HREF Dir Instead File.
@c Not very good? :-/
@cindex HREF Dir instead file
@vindex T2H_HREF_DIR_INSTEAD_FILE
if set (e.g., to @file{index.html}) replace @strong{HREF}'s
to this file  (i.e., to @file{index.html}) by @file{./}

$T2H_HREF_DIR_INSTEAD_FILE = "";
