@comment -*-texinfo-*-
@comment Id: INSTALL_win.texi,v 1.1 2003/08/08 14:27:06 pertusus Exp $
@c FILE:    INSTALL.texi
@c PURPOSE: Installation instructions for Singular on MSWindows
@c          This file is displayed during installation and copied to
@c          /etc/INSTALL

@c use set CD for producing a special INSTALL_win which will be opened
@c by the autorun on the Singular CD

@ifclear singularmanual
@c @set CD
@end ifclear

@ifclear VERSION
@include version.texi
@end ifclear

@ifclear singularmanual
@majorheading Installation instructions for Singular on MS Windows.
@end ifclear

@heading For the impatient:
@itemize
@item
If you run Windows NT/2K/XP, make sure you are logged in with the
@code{Administrator} rights.
@item
If you have some older version of @code{Singular} installed, please uninstall it
before installing @code{Singular-@value{VERSION}}. It is recommended to
install the new @code{Singular} in the same directory where the previous
version was installed. Thus your existing environment will be used automatically.
@item 
If you have @code{Cygwin} or @code{XEmacs} installed and they do not belong
of some previous @code{Singular} installation,
please read the information below.
@item
Execute the self-extracting installation archive and
@strong{carefully} follow the instructions given there. 
Setup will analyze your system, create the corresponding configuration
and give you further tips on the installation process.
@item
In case of troubles, see the installed files @code{/etc/INSTALL.txt},
@code{/etc/TROUBLESHOOTING.txt} or visit
the @strong{Singular Forum} at @uref{http://www.singular.uni-kl.de/forum}.
@end itemize

@ifset CD
@ifhtml
@heading @strong{ @uref{Singular-@value{VERSION}-Typical.exe, Install Singular-@value{VERSION} Now!}}
@end ifhtml
@end ifset

@heading Installation preliminaries

Running @code{Singular} on MS Windows requires that the Cygwin DLL
(dynamically linked library) version 1.3.9 or higher is installed on your
system (see @uref{http://sources.redhat.com/cygwin/} for details about
Cygwin). We install and configure @code{Cygwin} version 1.3.9 automatically, if
the @code{BasicCygwin} component is selected (default setting).

To run @code{ESingular} (i.e. @code{Singular} within its Emacs interface) on
MS Windows requires furthermore that the @code{XEmacs} editor is installed on
your system. We install and configure @code{XEmacs} version 21.1.13 automatically, if the @code{XEmacs} component is selected.

@cindex Windows installation, components
@cindex Components of Windows installation

The @code{Singular} installation is divided into the following
components (you see them explicitly if you choose the Custom Setup Type
during the installation):
@table @code
@item @strong{Program Files:}
        @table @code
@item Singular
Contains the @code{Singular} Program, documentation and example files.
@*All files of this component are installed under the directory
@code{/usr/local/Singular/@value{VERSION}}
@item BasicCygwin
Contains the Cygwin DLL and basic tools/programs (like @code{bash} or
@code{info}) of the  Cygwin environment.
@*The Cygwin DLL and programs are installed in the directory
@code{/bin}. Miscellaneous documentation and configuration files are
installed into the directory @code{/etc}.
@item XEmacs
Contains the Cygwin port of the @code{XEmacs} editor (see
@url{http://www.xemacs.org} for more about @code{XEmacs}) version 21.1.13.
@*All files of this component are installed under the directory
@code{/usr/local}.
@item ESingular
Contains the @code{ESingular}, the most comfortable Singular interface.
Requires @code{XEmacs} to run.
        @end table
@item @strong{Remark:}
All essential DLLs, some programs and symbolic links are installed in the directory
@code{/usr/local/Singular/@value{VERSION}/ix86-Win}, which must be present in your @code{PATH} system variable.
@item @strong{Help Files:}
@table @code
@item WinHelp
Contains Singular Manual, converted to Windows help format (.hlp).
We recommend to install it, because it is small in size. Moreover,
we set it as default help browser in all the Singular executables.
@item HTML Help
Contains the "native" Singular Manual. It's not included by default,
because it is much bigger than WinHelp, though it has better typesetting
of mathematical formulae.
@end table
@end table

The Typical Setup Type of the Singular-@value{VERSION}-Typical.exe contains
@code{BasicCygwin}, @code{Singular}, 
@code{XEmacs}, @code{ESingular}, @code{WinHelp} and @code{HTML Help} 
components. The Compact Setup Type does not contain only the @code{HTML Help} component.

@ifclear CD
@heading Downloading preliminaries

To install @code{Singular} on a PC running Windows 95/98/ME/NT/2K/XP, you need
to download @strong{one} of the following archive files:

Minimal archive: @uref{Singular-@value{VERSION}-Compact.exe, Singular-@value{VERSION}-Compact.exe}      (@code{BasicCygwin}, @code{Singular}, @code{WinHelp} components)

Typical archive : @uref{Singular-@value{VERSION}-Typical.exe, Singular-@value{VERSION}-Typical.exe}      (@code{BasicCygwin}, @code{Singular}, @code{XEmacs}, @code{ESingular}, @code{WinHelp}, @code{HTML Help} components)

You can obtain these (and other) archives 
either from the @code{WINDOWS} directory on the @code{Singular} CD or from
@display
@uref{ftp://www.mathematik.uni-kl.de/pub/Math/Singular/}.
@end display

@end ifclear

@ifclear singularmanual
@strong{Important:} Please see
@ifhtml
@uref{COPYING.htm, COPYING.htm}
@end ifhtml
@ifnothtml
the file @code{/etc/COPYING.txt} contained in the distribution
@end ifnothtml
for license information on @code{Singular}. Please register yourself as a
@code{Singular} user by using the registration form on the @code{Singular}
homepage @uref{http://www.singular.uni-kl.de}.
If for some reason you cannot access the registration form, you can also
register by sending an email to @email{singular@@mathematik.uni-kl.de}
with subject line @code{register} and body containing the following data:
your name, email address, organisation, country and platform(s).
@end ifclear

@heading Installing Singular

The recent Setup program analyzes your system, e.g. it detects
whether Cygwin and XEmacs are present and functional. Then it gives you
hints and/or error messages with instructions during the installation.

@table @code
@item If you have Cygwin installed
        If the version of @code{cygwin1.dll} is not less than 1.3.9,
        you will be prompted that the @code{BasicCygwin} component will not
        be installed. Moreover, the existing Cygwin root directory will be proposed as
        the default installation directory. You can accept it, then
        @code{Singular} will be placed into the existing Cygwin environment.
        If you choose another destination, @code{Singular} will use Cygwin
        programs anyway. If your Cygwin has incorrect settings (like
        inconsistent mount points among the important ones), @code{Singular}
        Setup will correct them. 
@*      If setup could not detect @code{cygwin}, present in the system, you
        can try to break the installation, start it once more, choose the
        "Custom" setup type and unselect the @code{BasicCygwin} component.

@item If you have XEmacs installed
        The @code{Cygwin} port of @code{XEmacs} version 21.1.13 together 
        with the most
        important packages is included in the distribution. The use of 
        non-@code{Cygwin} ports or earlier @code{Cygwin} ports has some 
        quirks and does not work 
        properly together with @code{Singular} (i.e., running @code{ESingular} 
        results in problems). Nevertheless, if you want to test the
        compatibility of @code{ESingular} with your own @code{XEmacs}, just
        de-select the XEmacs component, but leave @code{ESingular} selected.
        If your @code{XEmacs} happens to be incompatible with ESingular, you can
        install just the XEmacs component and use in fact two different
        @code{XEmacs} programs. 
        The setup program will search for @code{XEmacs} and packages 
        in @code{<TARGETDIR>/usr/local/lib} (here @code{<TARGETDIR>} is the directory which you selected while running setup). If you have @code{Cygwin} and the Cygwin port of
        @code{XEmacs}, you might have @code{XEmacs} installed there. To avoid overwriting your @code{XEmacs} files, setup will ask you what to do.
@end table

@ifset CD
@ifhtml
@heading @strong{ @uref{Singular-@value{VERSION}-Typical.exe, Install Singular-@value{VERSION} Now!}}
@end ifhtml
@end ifset

@heading Customizing Singular

The following step(s) are optional:
@itemize
@item
To conveniently access all files on your computer, mount the drives of
your disk(s):
@enumerate
@item
Open a rxvt terminal (from Start->Programs->Singular 2.0->Tools).
@item
For each drive (letter) issue the following command (the drive @code{C:}
is used in the example):
@example
mount -f -s -t C: /C
@end example
@end enumerate
After mounting the drive(s) this way, you can conveniently access the
files on a drive from the @code{bash} shell and from @code{XEmacs} using the @code{/C/} prefix. Otherwise, you need to type @code{/cygdrive/C} - that is
the Cygwin convention. You can get more information on @code{mount} command by invoking @code{mount --help}. Command @code{umount} unmount the selected
mount point.


@item
Create your personal @code{HOME} directory.
@*Various applications (e.g., @code{bash} or @code{XEmacs}) store
user-specific configuration/customization files in the @code{HOME}
directory of the current user. During the installation, the @code{HOME}
directory is globally set for all users to @code{/home/Singular}. To
create your individual  @code{HOME} directory follow these steps:
@enumerate
@item
Create a directory (folder), say, @code{C:\home\MyHome}.
@item
Copy all files from @code{/home/Singular} to @code{C:\home\MyHome}.
@item
Set the @emph{user} environment variable @code{HOME} to @code{C:\home\MyHome}:
@*On Windows 95/98/ME, edit the respective line the @code{AUTOEXEC.BAT}
file.
@*On Windows NT/2K/XP add an entry in your @code{Environment} control
panel.
@item
Restart your computer (On Windows 95/98/ME).
@end enumerate
You may furthermore examine the files copied into your @code{HOME}
directory and adjust (i.e. edit) them to your personal
preferences/needs. System-wide settings are stored in the file 
@code{/etc/profile}.

@end itemize

@heading Uninstalling Singular

You can uninstall individual or all installed components by opening the
@code{Software} shortcut of the @code{Control panel}. 
Simply double-click the @code{Singular} item and
follow the instructions given there.


For any other troubles,
please send an email to @email{singular@@mathematik.uni-kl.de}
and include the header which is displayed by starting up @code{Singular}
with the @code{-v} option, and a description of your machine and
operating system.

@include info.texi

@ifclear singularmanual
GOOD LUCK and ENJOY!
Your @code{Singular} team.
@end ifclear

